RC.CO-3: Recovery activities are communicated to internal and external stakeholders as well as executive and management teams
CONTINGENCY PLAN
Control:
a. Develop a contingency plan for the system that:
1. Identifies essential mission and business functions and associated contingency
requirements;
2. Provides recovery objectives, restoration priorities, and metrics;
3. Addresses contingency roles, responsibilities, assigned individuals with contact
information;
4. Addresses maintaining essential mission and business functions despite a system
disruption, compromise, or failure;
5. Addresses eventual, full system restoration without deterioration of the controls
originally planned and implemented;
6. Addresses the sharing of contingency information; and
7. Is reviewed and approved by [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles];
b. Distribute copies of the contingency plan to [Assignment: organization-defined key
contingency personnel (identified by name and/or by role) and organizational elements];
c. Coordinate contingency planning activities with incident handling activities;
d. Review the contingency plan for the system [Assignment: organization-defined frequency];
e. Update the contingency plan to address changes to the organization, system, or
environment of operation and problems encountered during contingency plan
implementation, execution, or testing;
f. Communicate contingency plan changes to [Assignment: organization-defined key
contingency personnel (identified by name and/or by role) and organizational elements];
g. Incorporate lessons learned from contingency plan testing, training, or actual contingency
activities into contingency testing and training; and
h. Protect the contingency plan from unauthorized disclosure and modification.
Discussion: Contingency planning for systems is part of an overall program for achieving
continuity of operations for organizational mission and business functions. Contingency planning
addresses system restoration and implementation of alternative mission or business processes
when systems are compromised or breached. Contingency planning is considered throughout the
system development life cycle and is a fundamental part of the system design. Systems can be
designed for redundancy, to provide backup capabilities, and for resilience. Contingency plans
reflect the degree of restoration required for organizational systems since not all systems need
to fully recover to achieve the level of continuity of operations desired. System recovery
objectives reflect applicable laws, executive orders, directives, regulations, policies, standards,
guidelines, organizational risk tolerance, and system impact level.
Actions addressed in contingency plans include orderly system degradation, system shutdown,
fallback to a manual mode, alternate information flows, and operating in modes reserved for
when systems are under attack. By coordinating contingency planning with incident handling
activities, organizations ensure that the necessary planning activities are in place and activated in
the event of an incident. Organizations consider whether continuity of operations during an
incident conflicts with the capability to automatically disable the system, as specified in IR-4(5).
Incident response planning is part of contingency planning for organizations and is addressed in
the IR (Incident Response) family.
CONTINGENCY PLAN | COORDINATE WITH RELATED PLANS
Coordinate contingency plan development with organizational elements responsible for
related plans.
Discussion: Plans that are related to contingency plans include Business Continuity Plans,
Disaster Recovery Plans, Critical Infrastructure Plans, Continuity of Operations Plans, Crisis
Communications Plans, Insider Threat Implementation Plans, Data Breach Response Plans,
Cyber Incident Response Plans, Breach Response Plans, and Occupant Emergency Plans.
CONTINGENCY PLAN | CAPACITY PLANNING
Conduct capacity planning so that necessary capacity for information processing,
telecommunications, and environmental support exists during contingency operations.
Discussion: Capacity planning is needed because different threats can result in a reduction
of the available processing, telecommunications, and support services intended to support
essential mission and business functions. Organizations anticipate degraded operations
during contingency operations and factor the degradation into capacity planning. For
capacity planning, environmental support refers to any environmental factor for which the
organization determines that it needs to provide support in a contingency situation, even if
in a degraded state. Such determinations are based on an organizational assessment of risk,
system categorization (impact level), and organizational risk tolerance.
CONTINGENCY PLAN | RESUME MISSION AND BUSINESS FUNCTIONS
Plan for the resumption of [Selection: all; essential] mission and business functions within
[Assignment: organization-defined time period] of contingency plan activation.
Discussion: Organizations may choose to conduct contingency planning activities to resume
mission and business functions as part of business continuity planning or as part of business
impact analyses. Organizations prioritize the resumption of mission and business functions.
The time period for resuming mission and business functions may be dependent on the
severity and extent of the disruptions to the system and its supporting infrastructure.
CONTINGENCY PLAN | CONTINUE MISSION AND BUSINESS FUNCTIONS
Plan for the continuance of [Selection: all; essential] mission and business functions with
minimal or no loss of operational continuity and sustains that continuity until full system
restoration at primary processing and/or storage sites.
Discussion: Organizations may choose to conduct the contingency planning activities to
continue mission and business functions as part of business continuity planning or business
impact analyses. Primary processing and/or storage sites defined by organizations as part of
contingency planning may change depending on the circumstances associated with the
contingency.
CONTINGENCY PLAN | ALTERNATE PROCESSING AND STORAGE SITES
Plan for the transfer of [Selection: all; essential] mission and business functions to
alternate processing and/or storage sites with minimal or no loss of operational continuity
and sustain that continuity through system restoration to primary processing and/or
storage sites.
Discussion: Organizations may choose to conduct contingency planning activities for
alternate processing and storage sites as part of business continuity planning or business
impact analyses. Primary processing and/or storage sites defined by organizations as part of
contingency planning may change depending on the circumstances associated with the
contingency.
CONTINGENCY PLAN | COORDINATE WITH EXTERNAL SERVICE PROVIDERS
Coordinate the contingency plan with the contingency plans of external service providers
to ensure that contingency requirements can be satisfied.
Discussion: When the capability of an organization to carry out its mission and business
functions is dependent on external service providers, developing a comprehensive and
timely contingency plan may become more challenging. When mission and business
functions are dependent on external service providers, organizations coordinate contingency
planning activities with the external entities to ensure that the individual plans reflect the
overall contingency needs of the organization.
CONTINGENCY PLAN | IDENTIFY CRITICAL ASSETS
Identify critical system assets supporting [Selection: all; essential] mission and business
functions.
Discussion: Organizations may choose to identify critical assets as part of criticality analysis,
business continuity planning, or business impact analyses. Organizations identify critical
system assets so that additional controls can be employed (beyond the controls routinely
implemented) to help ensure that organizational mission and business functions can
continue to be conducted during contingency operations. The identification of critical
information assets also facilitates the prioritization of organizational resources. Critical
system assets include technical and operational aspects. Technical aspects include system
components, information technology services, information technology products, and
mechanisms. Operational aspects include procedures (i.e., manually executed operations)
and personnel (i.e., individuals operating technical controls and/or executing manual
procedures). Organizational program protection plans can assist in identifying critical assets.
If critical assets are resident within or supported by external service providers, organizations
consider implementing CP-2(7) as a control enhancement
INCIDENT HANDLING
Control:
a. Implement an incident handling capability for incidents that is consistent with the incident
response plan and includes preparation, detection and analysis, containment, eradication,
and recovery;
b. Coordinate incident handling activities with contingency planning activities;
c. Incorporate lessons learned from ongoing incident handling activities into incident response
procedures, training, and testing, and implement the resulting changes accordingly; and
d. Ensure the rigor, intensity, scope, and results of incident handling activities are comparable
and predictable across the organization.
Discussion: Organizations recognize that incident response capabilities are dependent on the
capabilities of organizational systems and the mission and business processes being supported by
those systems. Organizations consider incident response as part of the definition, design, and
development of mission and business processes and systems. Incident-related information can
be obtained from a variety of sources, including audit monitoring, physical access monitoring,
and network monitoring; user or administrator reports; and reported supply chain events. An
effective incident handling capability includes coordination among many organizational entities
(e.g., mission or business owners, system owners, authorizing officials, human resources offices,
physical security offices, personnel security offices, legal departments, risk executive [function],
operations personnel, procurement offices). Suspected security incidents include the receipt of
suspicious email communications that can contain malicious code. Suspected supply chain
incidents include the insertion of counterfeit hardware or malicious code into organizational
systems or system components. For federal agencies, an incident that involves personally
identifiable information is considered a breach. A breach results in unauthorized disclosure, the
loss of control, unauthorized acquisition, compromise, or a similar occurrence where a person
other than an authorized user accesses or potentially accesses personally identifiable
information or an authorized user accesses or potentially accesses such information for other
than authorized purposes.
) INCIDENT HANDLING | AUTOMATED INCIDENT HANDLING PROCESSES
Support the incident handling process using [Assignment: organization-defined automated
mechanisms].
Discussion: Automated mechanisms that support incident handling processes include online
incident management systems and tools that support the collection of live response data,
full network packet capture, and forensic analysis.
INCIDENT HANDLING | DYNAMIC RECONFIGURATION
Include the following types of dynamic reconfiguration for [Assignment: organizationdefined system components] as part of the incident response capability: [Assignment:
organization-defined types of dynamic reconfiguration].
Discussion: Dynamic reconfiguration includes changes to router rules, access control lists,
intrusion detection or prevention system parameters, and filter rules for guards or firewalls.
Organizations may perform dynamic reconfiguration of systems to stop attacks, misdirect
attackers, and isolate components of systems, thus limiting the extent of the damage from
breaches or compromises. Organizations include specific time frames for achieving the
reconfiguration of systems in the definition of the reconfiguration capability, considering the
potential need for rapid response to effectively address cyber threats.
INCIDENT HANDLING | CONTINUITY OF OPERATIONS
Identify [Assignment: organization-defined classes of incidents] and take the following
actions in response to those incidents to ensure continuation of organizational mission and
business functions: [Assignment: organization-defined actions to take in response to
classes of incidents].
Discussion: Classes of incidents include malfunctions due to design or implementation
errors and omissions, targeted malicious attacks, and untargeted malicious attacks. Incident
response actions include orderly system degradation, system shutdown, fall back to manual
mode or activation of alternative technology whereby the system operates differently,
employing deceptive measures, alternate information flows, or operating in a mode that is
reserved for when systems are under attack. Organizations consider whether continuity of
operations requirements during an incident conflict with the capability to automatically
disable the system as specified as part of IR-4(5).
INCIDENT HANDLING | INFORMATION CORRELATION
Correlate incident information and individual incident responses to achieve an
organization-wide perspective on incident awareness and response.
Discussion: Sometimes, a threat event, such as a hostile cyber-attack, can only be observed
by bringing together information from different sources, including various reports and
reporting procedures established by organizations.
INCIDENT HANDLING | AUTOMATIC DISABLING OF SYSTEM
Implement a configurable capability to automatically disable the system if [Assignment:
organization-defined security violations] are detected.
Discussion: Organizations consider whether the capability to automatically disable the
system conflicts with continuity of operations requirements specified as part of CP-2 or IR4(3). Security violations include cyber-attacks that have compromised the integrity of the
system or exfiltrated organizational information and serious errors in software programs
that could adversely impact organizational missions or functions or jeopardize the safety of
individuals.
INCIDENT HANDLING | INSIDER THREATS
Implement an incident handling capability for incidents involving insider threats.
Discussion: Explicit focus on handling incidents involving insider threats provides additional
emphasis on this type of threat and the need for specific incident handling capabilities to
provide appropriate and timely responses.
INCIDENT HANDLING | INSIDER THREATS — INTRA-ORGANIZATION COORDINATION
Coordinate an incident handling capability for insider threats that includes the following
organizational entities [Assignment: organization-defined entities].
Discussion: Incident handling for insider threat incidents (e.g., preparation, detection and
analysis, containment, eradication, and recovery) requires coordination among many
organizational entities, including mission or business owners, system owners, human
resources offices, procurement offices, personnel offices, physical security offices, senior
agency information security officer, operations personnel, risk executive (function), senior
agency official for privacy, and legal counsel. In addition, organizations may require external
support from federal, state, and local law enforcement agencies.
INCIDENT HANDLING | CORRELATION WITH EXTERNAL ORGANIZATIONS
Coordinate with [Assignment: organization-defined external organizations] to correlate
and share [Assignment: organization-defined incident information] to achieve a crossorganization perspective on incident awareness and more effective incident responses.
Discussion: The coordination of incident information with external organizations—including
mission or business partners, military or coalition partners, customers, and developers—can
provide significant benefits. Cross-organizational coordination can serve as an important risk
management capability. This capability allows organizations to leverage information from a
variety of sources to effectively respond to incidents and breaches that could potentially
affect the organization’s operations, assets, and individuals.
INCIDENT HANDLING | DYNAMIC RESPONSE CAPABILITY
Employ [Assignment: organization-defined dynamic response capabilities] to respond to
incidents.
Discussion: The dynamic response capability addresses the timely deployment of new or
replacement organizational capabilities in response to incidents. This includes capabilities
implemented at the mission and business process level and at the system level.
INCIDENT HANDLING | SUPPLY CHAIN COORDINATION
Coordinate incident handling activities involving supply chain events with other
organizations involved in the supply chain.
Discussion: Organizations involved in supply chain activities include product developers,
system integrators, manufacturers, packagers, assemblers, distributors, vendors, and
resellers. Supply chain incidents can occur anywhere through or to the supply chain and
include compromises or breaches that involve primary or sub-tier providers, information
technology products, system components, development processes or personnel, and
distribution processes or warehousing facilities. Organizations consider including processes
for protecting and sharing incident information in information exchange agreements and
their obligations for reporting incidents to government oversight bodies (e.g., Federal
Acquisition Security Council).
INCIDENT HANDLING | INTEGRATED INCIDENT RESPONSE TEAM
Establish and maintain an integrated incident response team that can be deployed to any
location identified by the organization in [Assignment: organization-defined time period].
Discussion: An integrated incident response team is a team of experts that assesses,
documents, and responds to incidents so that organizational systems and networks can
recover quickly and implement the necessary controls to avoid future incidents. Incident
response team personnel include forensic and malicious code analysts, tool developers,
systems security and privacy engineers, and real-time operations personnel. The incident
handling capability includes performing rapid forensic preservation of evidence and analysis
of and response to intrusions. For some organizations, the incident response team can be a
cross-organizational entity.
An integrated incident response team facilitates information sharing and allows
organizational personnel (e.g., developers, implementers, and operators) to leverage team
knowledge of the threat and implement defensive measures that enable organizations to
deter intrusions more effectively. Moreover, integrated teams promote the rapid detection
of intrusions, the development of appropriate mitigations, and the deployment of effective
defensive measures. For example, when an intrusion is detected, the integrated team can
rapidly develop an appropriate response for operators to implement, correlate the new
incident with information on past intrusions, and augment ongoing cyber intelligence
development. Integrated incident response teams are better able to identify adversary
tactics, techniques, and procedures that are linked to the operations tempo or specific
mission and business functions and to define responsive actions in a way that does not
disrupt those mission and business functions. Incident response teams can be distributed
within organizations to make the capability resilient.
INCIDENT HANDLING | MALICIOUS CODE AND FORENSIC ANALYSIS
Analyze malicious code and/or other residual artifacts remaining in the system after the
incident.
Discussion: When conducted carefully in an isolated environment, analysis of malicious code
and other residual artifacts of a security incident or breach can give the organization insight
into adversary tactics, techniques, and procedures. It can also indicate the identity or some
defining characteristics of the adversary. In addition, malicious code analysis can help the
organization develop responses to future incidents.
)INCIDENT HANDLING | BEHAVIOR ANALYSIS
Analyze anomalous or suspected adversarial behavior in or related to [Assignment:
organization-defined environments or resources].
Discussion: If the organization maintains a deception environment, an analysis of behaviors
in that environment, including resources targeted by the adversary and timing of the
incident or event, can provide insight into adversarial tactics, techniques, and procedures.
External to a deception environment, the analysis of anomalous adversarial behavior (e.g.,
changes in system performance or usage patterns) or suspected behavior (e.g., changes in
searches for the location of specific resources) can give the organization such insight.
)INCIDENT HANDLING | SECURITY OPERATIONS CENTER
Establish and maintain a security operations center.
Discussion: A security operations center (SOC) is the focal point for security operations and
computer network defense for an organization. The purpose of the SOC is to defend and
monitor an organization’s systems and networks (i.e., cyber infrastructure) on an ongoing
basis. The SOC is also responsible for detecting, analyzing, and responding to cybersecurity
incidents in a timely manner. The organization staffs the SOC with skilled technical and
operational personnel (e.g., security analysts, incident response personnel, systems security
engineers) and implements a combination of technical, management, and operational
controls (including monitoring, scanning, and forensics tools) to monitor, fuse, correlate,
analyze, and respond to threat and security-relevant event data from multiple sources.
These sources include perimeter defenses, network devices (e.g., routers, switches), and
endpoint agent data feeds. The SOC provides a holistic situational awareness capability to
help organizations determine the security posture of the system and organization. A SOC
capability can be obtained in a variety of ways. Larger organizations may implement a
dedicated SOC while smaller organizations may employ third-party organizations to provide
such a capability.
INCIDENT HANDLING | PUBLIC RELATIONS AND REPUTATION REPAIR
(a) Manage public relations associated with an incident; and
(b) Employ measures to repair the reputation of the organization.
Discussion: It is important for an organization to have a strategy in place for addressing
incidents that have been brought to the attention of the general public, have cast the
organization in a negative light, or have affected the organization’s constituents (e.g.,
partners, customers). Such publicity can be extremely harmful to the organization and affect
its ability to carry out its mission and business functions. Taking proactive steps to repair the
organization’s reputation is an essential aspect of reestablishing the trust and confidence of
its constituents.