PR.AT-5: Physical and cybersecurity personnel understand their roles and responsibilities
ROLE-BASED TRAINING
Control:
a. Provide role-based security and privacy training to personnel with the following roles and
responsibilities: [Assignment: organization-defined roles and responsibilities]:
1. Before authorizing access to the system, information, or performing assigned duties,
and [Assignment: organization-defined frequency] thereafter; and
2. When required by system changes;
b. Update role-based training content [Assignment: organization-defined frequency] and
following [Assignment: organization-defined events]; and
c. Incorporate lessons learned from internal or external security incidents or breaches into
role-based training.
Discussion: Organizations determine the content of training based on the assigned roles and
responsibilities of individuals as well as the security and privacy requirements of organizations
and the systems to which personnel have authorized access, including technical training
specifically tailored for assigned duties. Roles that may require role-based training include senior
leaders or management officials (e.g., head of agency/chief executive officer, chief information
officer, senior accountable official for risk management, senior agency information security
officer, senior agency official for privacy), system owners; authorizing officials; system security
officers; privacy officers; acquisition and procurement officials; enterprise architects; systems
engineers; software developers; systems security engineers; privacy engineers; system, network,
and database administrators; auditors; personnel conducting configuration management
activities; personnel performing verification and validation activities; personnel with access to
system-level software; control assessors; personnel with contingency planning and incident
response duties; personnel with privacy management responsibilities; and personnel with access
to personally identifiable information.
Comprehensive role-based training addresses management, operational, and technical roles and
responsibilities covering physical, personnel, and technical controls. Role-based training also
includes policies, procedures, tools, methods, and artifacts for the security and privacy roles
defined. Organizations provide the training necessary for individuals to fulfill their responsibilities
related to operations and supply chain risk management within the context of organizational
security and privacy programs. Role-based training also applies to contractors who provide
services to federal agencies. Types of training include web-based and computer-based training,
classroom-style training, and hands-on training (including micro-training). Updating role-based
training on a regular basis helps to ensure that the content remains relevant and effective.
Events that may precipitate an update to role-based training content include, but are not limited
to, assessment or audit findings, security incidents or breaches, or changes in applicable laws,
executive orders, directives, regulations, policies, standards, and guidelines.
ROLE-BASED TRAINING | ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROLS
Provide [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles] with initial and
[Assignment: organization-defined frequency] training in the employment and operation
of environmental controls.
Discussion: Environmental controls include fire suppression and detection devices or
systems, sprinkler systems, handheld fire extinguishers, fixed fire hoses, smoke detectors,
temperature or humidity, heating, ventilation, air conditioning, and power within the facility.
ROLE-BASED TRAINING | PHYSICAL SECURITY CONTROLS
Provide [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles] with initial and
[Assignment: organization-defined frequency] training in the employment and operation
of physical security controls.
Discussion: Physical security controls include physical access control devices, physical
intrusion and detection alarms, operating procedures for facility security guards, and
monitoring or surveillance equipment.
ROLE-BASED TRAINING | PRACTICAL EXERCISES
Provide practical exercises in security and privacy training that reinforce training
objectives.
Discussion: Practical exercises for security include training for software developers that
addresses simulated attacks that exploit common software vulnerabilities or spear or whale
phishing attacks targeted at senior leaders or executives. Practical exercises for privacy
include modules with quizzes on identifying and processing personally identifiable
information in various scenarios or scenarios on conducting privacy impact assessments.
ROLE-BASED TRAINING | PROCESSING PERSONALLY IDENTIFIABLE INFORMATION
Provide [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles] with initial and
[Assignment: organization-defined frequency] training in the employment and operation
of personally identifiable information processing and transparency controls.
Discussion: Personally identifiable information processing and transparency controls include
the organization’s authority to process personally identifiable information and personally
identifiable information processing purposes. Role-based training for federal agencies
addresses the types of information that may constitute personally identifiable information
and the risks, considerations, and obligations associated with its processing. Such training
also considers the authority to process personally identifiable information documented in
privacy policies and notices, system of records notices, computer matching agreements and
notices, privacy impact assessments, [PRIVACT] statements, contracts, information sharing
agreements, memoranda of understanding, and/or other documentation.
INCIDENT RESPONSE TRAINING
Control:
a. Provide incident response training to system users consistent with assigned roles and
responsibilities:
1. Within [Assignment: organization-defined time period] of assuming an incident response
role or responsibility or acquiring system access;
2. When required by system changes; and
3. [Assignment: organization-defined frequency] thereafter; and
b. Review and update incident response training content [Assignment: organization-defined
frequency] and following [Assignment: organization-defined events].
Discussion: Incident response training is associated with the assigned roles and responsibilities
of organizational personnel to ensure that the appropriate content and level of detail are
included in such training. For example, users may only need to know who to call or how to
recognize an incident; system administrators may require additional training on how to handle
incidents; and incident responders may receive more specific training on forensics, data
collection techniques, reporting, system recovery, and system restoration. Incident response
training includes user training in identifying and reporting suspicious activities from external and
internal sources. Incident response training for users may be provided as part of AT-2 or AT-3.
Events that may precipitate an update to incident response training content include, but are not
limited to, incident response plan testing or response to an actual incident (lessons learned),
assessment or audit findings, or changes in applicable laws, executive orders, directives,
regulations, policies, standards, and guidelines.
INCIDENT RESPONSE TRAINING | SIMULATED EVENTS
Incorporate simulated events into incident response training to facilitate the required
response by personnel in crisis situations.
Discussion: Organizations establish requirements for responding to incidents in incident
response plans. Incorporating simulated events into incident response training helps to
ensure that personnel understand their individual responsibilities and what specific actions
to take in crisis situations
INCIDENT RESPONSE TRAINING | AUTOMATED TRAINING ENVIRONMENTS
Provide an incident response training environment using [Assignment: organizationdefined automated mechanisms].
Discussion: Automated mechanisms can provide a more thorough and realistic incident
response training environment. This can be accomplished, for example, by providing more
complete coverage of incident response issues, selecting more realistic training scenarios
and environments, and stressing the response capability.
INCIDENT RESPONSE TRAINING | BREACH
Provide incident response training on how to identify and respond to a breach, including
the organization’s process for reporting a breach.
Discussion: For federal agencies, an incident that involves personally identifiable
information is considered a breach. A breach results in the loss of control, compromise,
unauthorized disclosure, unauthorized acquisition, or a similar occurrence where a person
other than an authorized user accesses or potentially accesses personally identifiable
information or an authorized user accesses or potentially accesses such information for
other than authorized purposes. The incident response training emphasizes the obligation of
individuals to report both confirmed and suspected breaches involving information in any
medium or form, including paper, oral, and electronic. Incident response training includes
tabletop exercises that simulate a breach.
SECURITY AND PRIVACY WORKFORCE
Control: Establish a security and privacy workforce development and improvement program.
Discussion: Security and privacy workforce development and improvement programs include
defining the knowledge, skills, and abilities needed to perform security and privacy duties and
tasks; developing role-based training programs for individuals assigned security and privacy roles
and responsibilities; and providing standards and guidelines for measuring and building individual
qualifications for incumbents and applicants for security- and privacy-related positions. Such
workforce development and improvement programs can also include security and privacy career
paths to encourage security and privacy professionals to advance in the field and fill positions
with greater responsibility. The programs encourage organizations to fill security- and privacyrelated positions with qualified personnel. Security and privacy workforce development and
improvement programs are complementary to organizational security awareness and training
programs and focus on developing and institutionalizing the core security and privacy capabilities
of personnel needed to protect organizational operations, assets, and individuals.