PR.AT-4: Senior executives understand their roles and responsibilities
ROLE-BASED TRAINING
Control:
a. Provide role-based security and privacy training to personnel with the following roles and
responsibilities: [Assignment: organization-defined roles and responsibilities]:
1. Before authorizing access to the system, information, or performing assigned duties,
and [Assignment: organization-defined frequency] thereafter; and
2. When required by system changes;
b. Update role-based training content [Assignment: organization-defined frequency] and
following [Assignment: organization-defined events]; and
c. Incorporate lessons learned from internal or external security incidents or breaches into
role-based training.
Discussion: Organizations determine the content of training based on the assigned roles and
responsibilities of individuals as well as the security and privacy requirements of organizations
and the systems to which personnel have authorized access, including technical training
specifically tailored for assigned duties. Roles that may require role-based training include senior
leaders or management officials (e.g., head of agency/chief executive officer, chief information
officer, senior accountable official for risk management, senior agency information security
officer, senior agency official for privacy), system owners; authorizing officials; system security
officers; privacy officers; acquisition and procurement officials; enterprise architects; systems
engineers; software developers; systems security engineers; privacy engineers; system, network,
and database administrators; auditors; personnel conducting configuration management
activities; personnel performing verification and validation activities; personnel with access to
system-level software; control assessors; personnel with contingency planning and incident
response duties; personnel with privacy management responsibilities; and personnel with access
to personally identifiable information.
Comprehensive role-based training addresses management, operational, and technical roles and
responsibilities covering physical, personnel, and technical controls. Role-based training also
includes policies, procedures, tools, methods, and artifacts for the security and privacy roles
defined. Organizations provide the training necessary for individuals to fulfill their responsibilities
related to operations and supply chain risk management within the context of organizational
security and privacy programs. Role-based training also applies to contractors who provide
services to federal agencies. Types of training include web-based and computer-based training,
classroom-style training, and hands-on training (including micro-training). Updating role-based
training on a regular basis helps to ensure that the content remains relevant and effective.
Events that may precipitate an update to role-based training content include, but are not limited
to, assessment or audit findings, security incidents or breaches, or changes in applicable laws,
executive orders, directives, regulations, policies, standards, and guidelines.
ROLE-BASED TRAINING | ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROLS
Provide [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles] with initial and
[Assignment: organization-defined frequency] training in the employment and operation
of environmental controls.
Discussion: Environmental controls include fire suppression and detection devices or
systems, sprinkler systems, handheld fire extinguishers, fixed fire hoses, smoke detectors,
temperature or humidity, heating, ventilation, air conditioning, and power within the facility.
ROLE-BASED TRAINING | PHYSICAL SECURITY CONTROLS
Provide [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles] with initial and
[Assignment: organization-defined frequency] training in the employment and operation
of physical security controls.
Discussion: Physical security controls include physical access control devices, physical
intrusion and detection alarms, operating procedures for facility security guards, and
monitoring or surveillance equipment.
ROLE-BASED TRAINING | PRACTICAL EXERCISES
Provide practical exercises in security and privacy training that reinforce training
objectives.
Discussion: Practical exercises for security include training for software developers that
addresses simulated attacks that exploit common software vulnerabilities or spear or whale
phishing attacks targeted at senior leaders or executives. Practical exercises for privacy
include modules with quizzes on identifying and processing personally identifiable
information in various scenarios or scenarios on conducting privacy impact assessments.
ROLE-BASED TRAINING | PROCESSING PERSONALLY IDENTIFIABLE INFORMATION
Provide [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles] with initial and
[Assignment: organization-defined frequency] training in the employment and operation
of personally identifiable information processing and transparency controls.
Discussion: Personally identifiable information processing and transparency controls include
the organization’s authority to process personally identifiable information and personally
identifiable information processing purposes. Role-based training for federal agencies
addresses the types of information that may constitute personally identifiable information
and the risks, considerations, and obligations associated with its processing. Such training
also considers the authority to process personally identifiable information documented in
privacy policies and notices, system of records notices, computer matching agreements and
notices, privacy impact assessments, [PRIVACT] statements, contracts, information sharing
agreements, memoranda of understanding, and/or other documentation.
SECURITY AND PRIVACY WORKFORCE
Control: Establish a security and privacy workforce development and improvement program.
Discussion: Security and privacy workforce development and improvement programs include
defining the knowledge, skills, and abilities needed to perform security and privacy duties and
tasks; developing role-based training programs for individuals assigned security and privacy roles
and responsibilities; and providing standards and guidelines for measuring and building individual
qualifications for incumbents and applicants for security- and privacy-related positions. Such
workforce development and improvement programs can also include security and privacy career
paths to encourage security and privacy professionals to advance in the field and fill positions
with greater responsibility. The programs encourage organizations to fill security- and privacyrelated positions with qualified personnel. Security and privacy workforce development and
improvement programs are complementary to organizational security awareness and training
programs and focus on developing and institutionalizing the core security and privacy capabilities
of personnel needed to protect organizational operations, assets, and individuals.