RC.RP-1: Recovery plan is executed during or after a cybersecurity incident
SYSTEM RECOVERY AND RECONSTITUTION
Control: Provide for the recovery and reconstitution of the system to a known state within
[Assignment: organization-defined time period consistent with recovery time and recovery point
objectives] after a disruption, compromise, or failure.
Discussion: Recovery is executing contingency plan activities to restore organizational mission
and business functions. Reconstitution takes place following recovery and includes activities for
returning systems to fully operational states. Recovery and reconstitution operations reflect
mission and business priorities; recovery point, recovery time, and reconstitution objectives; and
organizational metrics consistent with contingency plan requirements. Reconstitution includes
the deactivation of interim system capabilities that may have been needed during recovery
operations. Reconstitution also includes assessments of fully restored system capabilities,
reestablishment of continuous monitoring activities, system reauthorization (if required), and
activities to prepare the system and organization for future disruptions, breaches, compromises,
or failures. Recovery and reconstitution capabilities can include automated mechanisms and
manual procedures. Organizations establish recovery time and recovery point objectives as part
of contingency planning
SYSTEM RECOVERY AND RECONSTITUTION | TRANSACTION RECOVERY
Implement transaction recovery for systems that are transaction-based.
Discussion: Transaction-based systems include database management systems and
transaction processing systems. Mechanisms supporting transaction recovery include
transaction rollback and transaction journaling.
SYSTEM RECOVERY AND RECONSTITUTION | RESTORE WITHIN TIME PERIOD
Provide the capability to restore system components within [Assignment: organizationdefined restoration time periods] from configuration-controlled and integrity-protected
information representing a known, operational state for the components.
Discussion: Restoration of system components includes reimaging, which restores the
components to known, operational states.
SYSTEM RECOVERY AND RECONSTITUTION | COMPONENT PROTECTION
Protect system components used for recovery and reconstitution.
Discussion: Protection of system recovery and reconstitution components (i.e., hardware,
firmware, and software) includes physical and technical controls. Backup and restoration
components used for recovery and reconstitution include router tables, compilers, and other
system software.
INCIDENT HANDLING
Control:
a. Implement an incident handling capability for incidents that is consistent with the incident
response plan and includes preparation, detection and analysis, containment, eradication,
and recovery;
b. Coordinate incident handling activities with contingency planning activities;
c. Incorporate lessons learned from ongoing incident handling activities into incident response
procedures, training, and testing, and implement the resulting changes accordingly; and
d. Ensure the rigor, intensity, scope, and results of incident handling activities are comparable
and predictable across the organization.
Discussion: Organizations recognize that incident response capabilities are dependent on the
capabilities of organizational systems and the mission and business processes being supported by
those systems. Organizations consider incident response as part of the definition, design, and
development of mission and business processes and systems. Incident-related information can
be obtained from a variety of sources, including audit monitoring, physical access monitoring,
and network monitoring; user or administrator reports; and reported supply chain events. An
effective incident handling capability includes coordination among many organizational entities
(e.g., mission or business owners, system owners, authorizing officials, human resources offices,
physical security offices, personnel security offices, legal departments, risk executive [function],
operations personnel, procurement offices). Suspected security incidents include the receipt of
suspicious email communications that can contain malicious code. Suspected supply chain
incidents include the insertion of counterfeit hardware or malicious code into organizational
systems or system components. For federal agencies, an incident that involves personally
identifiable information is considered a breach. A breach results in unauthorized disclosure, the
loss of control, unauthorized acquisition, compromise, or a similar occurrence where a person
other than an authorized user accesses or potentially accesses personally identifiable
information or an authorized user accesses or potentially accesses such information for other
than authorized purposes.
) INCIDENT HANDLING | AUTOMATED INCIDENT HANDLING PROCESSES
Support the incident handling process using [Assignment: organization-defined automated
mechanisms].
Discussion: Automated mechanisms that support incident handling processes include online
incident management systems and tools that support the collection of live response data,
full network packet capture, and forensic analysis.
INCIDENT HANDLING | DYNAMIC RECONFIGURATION
Include the following types of dynamic reconfiguration for [Assignment: organizationdefined system components] as part of the incident response capability: [Assignment:
organization-defined types of dynamic reconfiguration].
Discussion: Dynamic reconfiguration includes changes to router rules, access control lists,
intrusion detection or prevention system parameters, and filter rules for guards or firewalls.
Organizations may perform dynamic reconfiguration of systems to stop attacks, misdirect
attackers, and isolate components of systems, thus limiting the extent of the damage from
breaches or compromises. Organizations include specific time frames for achieving the
reconfiguration of systems in the definition of the reconfiguration capability, considering the
potential need for rapid response to effectively address cyber threats.
INCIDENT HANDLING | CONTINUITY OF OPERATIONS
Identify [Assignment: organization-defined classes of incidents] and take the following
actions in response to those incidents to ensure continuation of organizational mission and
business functions: [Assignment: organization-defined actions to take in response to
classes of incidents].
Discussion: Classes of incidents include malfunctions due to design or implementation
errors and omissions, targeted malicious attacks, and untargeted malicious attacks. Incident
response actions include orderly system degradation, system shutdown, fall back to manual
mode or activation of alternative technology whereby the system operates differently,
employing deceptive measures, alternate information flows, or operating in a mode that is
reserved for when systems are under attack. Organizations consider whether continuity of
operations requirements during an incident conflict with the capability to automatically
disable the system as specified as part of IR-4(5).
INCIDENT HANDLING | INFORMATION CORRELATION
Correlate incident information and individual incident responses to achieve an
organization-wide perspective on incident awareness and response.
Discussion: Sometimes, a threat event, such as a hostile cyber-attack, can only be observed
by bringing together information from different sources, including various reports and
reporting procedures established by organizations.
INCIDENT HANDLING | AUTOMATIC DISABLING OF SYSTEM
Implement a configurable capability to automatically disable the system if [Assignment:
organization-defined security violations] are detected.
Discussion: Organizations consider whether the capability to automatically disable the
system conflicts with continuity of operations requirements specified as part of CP-2 or IR4(3). Security violations include cyber-attacks that have compromised the integrity of the
system or exfiltrated organizational information and serious errors in software programs
that could adversely impact organizational missions or functions or jeopardize the safety of
individuals.
INCIDENT HANDLING | INSIDER THREATS
Implement an incident handling capability for incidents involving insider threats.
Discussion: Explicit focus on handling incidents involving insider threats provides additional
emphasis on this type of threat and the need for specific incident handling capabilities to
provide appropriate and timely responses.
INCIDENT HANDLING | INSIDER THREATS — INTRA-ORGANIZATION COORDINATION
Coordinate an incident handling capability for insider threats that includes the following
organizational entities [Assignment: organization-defined entities].
Discussion: Incident handling for insider threat incidents (e.g., preparation, detection and
analysis, containment, eradication, and recovery) requires coordination among many
organizational entities, including mission or business owners, system owners, human
resources offices, procurement offices, personnel offices, physical security offices, senior
agency information security officer, operations personnel, risk executive (function), senior
agency official for privacy, and legal counsel. In addition, organizations may require external
support from federal, state, and local law enforcement agencies.
INCIDENT HANDLING | CORRELATION WITH EXTERNAL ORGANIZATIONS
Coordinate with [Assignment: organization-defined external organizations] to correlate
and share [Assignment: organization-defined incident information] to achieve a crossorganization perspective on incident awareness and more effective incident responses.
Discussion: The coordination of incident information with external organizations—including
mission or business partners, military or coalition partners, customers, and developers—can
provide significant benefits. Cross-organizational coordination can serve as an important risk
management capability. This capability allows organizations to leverage information from a
variety of sources to effectively respond to incidents and breaches that could potentially
affect the organization’s operations, assets, and individuals.
INCIDENT HANDLING | DYNAMIC RESPONSE CAPABILITY
Employ [Assignment: organization-defined dynamic response capabilities] to respond to
incidents.