DE.CM-6: External service provider activity is monitored to detect potential cybersecurity events
CONTINUOUS MONITORING
Control: Develop a system-level continuous monitoring strategy and implement continuous
monitoring in accordance with the organization-level continuous monitoring strategy that
includes:
a. Establishing the following system-level metrics to be monitored: [Assignment: organizationdefined system-level metrics];
b. Establishing [Assignment: organization-defined frequencies] for monitoring and
[Assignment: organization-defined frequencies] for assessment of control effectiveness;
c. Ongoing control assessments in accordance with the continuous monitoring strategy;
d. Ongoing monitoring of system and organization-defined metrics in accordance with the
continuous monitoring strategy;
e. Correlation and analysis of information generated by control assessments and monitoring;
f. Response actions to address results of the analysis of control assessment and monitoring
information; and
g. Reporting the security and privacy status of the system to [Assignment: organizationdefined personnel or roles] [Assignment: organization-defined frequency].
Discussion: Continuous monitoring at the system level facilitates ongoing awareness of the
system security and privacy posture to support organizational risk management decisions. The
terms “continuous” and “ongoing” imply that organizations assess and monitor their controls
and risks at a frequency sufficient to support risk-based decisions. Different types of controls may
require different monitoring frequencies. The results of continuous monitoring generate risk
response actions by organizations. When monitoring the effectiveness of multiple controls that
have been grouped into capabilities, a root-cause analysis may be needed to determine the
specific control that has failed. Continuous monitoring programs allow organizations to maintain
the authorizations of systems and common controls in highly dynamic environments of operation
with changing mission and business needs, threats, vulnerabilities, and technologies. Having
access to security and privacy information on a continuing basis through reports and dashboards
gives organizational officials the ability to make effective and timely risk management decisions,
including ongoing authorization decisions.
Automation supports more frequent updates to hardware, software, and firmware inventories,
authorization packages, and other system information. Effectiveness is further enhanced when
continuous monitoring outputs are formatted to provide information that is specific, measurable,
actionable, relevant, and timely. Continuous monitoring activities are scaled in accordance with
the security categories of systems. Monitoring requirements, including the need for specific
monitoring, may be referenced in other controls and control enhancements,
CONTINUOUS MONITORING | INDEPENDENT ASSESSMENT
Employ independent assessors or assessment teams to monitor the controls in the system
on an ongoing basis.
Discussion: Organizations maximize the value of control assessments by requiring that
assessments be conducted by assessors with appropriate levels of independence. The level
of required independence is based on organizational continuous monitoring strategies.
Assessor independence provides a degree of impartiality to the monitoring process. To
achieve such impartiality, assessors do not create a mutual or conflicting interest with the
organizations where the assessments are being conducted, assess their own work, act as
management or employees of the organizations they are serving, or place themselves in
advocacy positions for the organizations acquiring their services.
CONTINUOUS MONITORING | TREND ANALYSES
Employ trend analyses to determine if control implementations, the frequency of
continuous monitoring activities, and the types of activities used in the continuous
monitoring process need to be modified based on empirical data.
Discussion: Trend analyses include examining recent threat information that addresses the
types of threat events that have occurred in the organization or the Federal Government,
success rates of certain types of attacks, emerging vulnerabilities in technologies, evolving
social engineering techniques, the effectiveness of configuration settings, results from
multiple control assessments, and findings from Inspectors General or auditors
CONTINUOUS MONITORING | RISK MONITORING
Ensure risk monitoring is an integral part of the continuous monitoring strategy that
includes the following:
(a) Effectiveness monitoring;
(b) Compliance monitoring; and
(c) Change monitoring.
Discussion: Risk monitoring is informed by the established organizational risk tolerance.
Effectiveness monitoring determines the ongoing effectiveness of the implemented risk
response measures. Compliance monitoring verifies that required risk response measures
are implemented. It also verifies that security and privacy requirements are satisfied. Change
monitoring identifies changes to organizational systems and environments of operation that
may affect security and privacy risk.
CONTINUOUS MONITORING | CONSISTENCY ANALYSIS
Employ the following actions to validate that policies are established and implemented
controls are operating in a consistent manner: [Assignment: organization-defined actions].
Discussion: Security and privacy controls are often added incrementally to a system. As a
result, policies for selecting and implementing controls may be inconsistent, and the controls
could fail to work together in a consistent or coordinated manner. At a minimum, the lack of
consistency and coordination could mean that there are unacceptable security and privacy
gaps in the system. At worst, it could mean that some of the controls implemented in one
location or by one component are actually impeding the functionality of other controls (e.g.,
encrypting internal network traffic can impede monitoring). In other situations, failing to
consistently monitor all implemented network protocols (e.g., a dual stack of IPv4 and IPv6)
may create unintended vulnerabilities in the system that could be exploited by adversaries.
It is important to validate—through testing, monitoring, and analysis—that the implemented
controls are operating in a consistent, coordinated, non-interfering manner.
) CONTINUOUS MONITORING | AUTOMATION SUPPORT FOR MONITORING
Ensure the accuracy, currency, and availability of monitoring results for the system using
[Assignment: organization-defined automated mechanisms].
Discussion: Using automated tools for monitoring helps to maintain the accuracy, currency,
and availability of monitoring information which in turns helps to increase the level of
ongoing awareness of the system security and privacy posture in support of organizational
risk management decisions.
EXTERNAL PERSONNEL SECURITY
Control:
a. Establish personnel security requirements, including security roles and responsibilities for
external providers;
b. Require external providers to comply with personnel security policies and procedures
established by the organization;
c. Document personnel security requirements;
d. Require external providers to notify [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles] of
any personnel transfers or terminations of external personnel who possess organizational
credentials and/or badges, or who have system privileges within [Assignment: organizationdefined time period]; and
e. Monitor provider compliance with personnel security requirements.
Discussion: External provider refers to organizations other than the organization operating or
acquiring the system. External providers include service bureaus, contractors, and other
organizations that provide system development, information technology services, testing or
assessment services, outsourced applications, and network/security management. Organizations
explicitly include personnel security requirements in acquisition-related documents. External
providers may have personnel working at organizational facilities with credentials, badges, or
system privileges issued by organizations. Notifications of external personnel changes ensure the
appropriate termination of privileges and credentials. Organizations define the transfers and
terminations deemed reportable by security-related characteristics that include functions, roles,
and the nature of credentials or privileges associated with transferred or terminated individuals.
ACQUISITION PROCESS
Control: Include the following requirements, descriptions, and criteria, explicitly or by reference,
using [Selection (one or more): standardized contract language; [Assignment: organizationdefined contract language]] in the acquisition contract for the system, system component, or
system service:
a. Security and privacy functional requirements;
b. Strength of mechanism requirements;
c. Security and privacy assurance requirements;
d. Controls needed to satisfy the security and privacy requirements.
e. Security and privacy documentation requirements;
f. Requirements for protecting security and privacy documentation;
g. Description of the system development environment and environment in which the system
is intended to operate;
h. Allocation of responsibility or identification of parties responsible for information security,
privacy, and supply chain risk management; and
i. Acceptance criteria.
Discussion: Security and privacy functional requirements are typically derived from the highlevel security and privacy requirements described in SA-2. The derived requirements include
security and privacy capabilities, functions, and mechanisms. Strength requirements associated
with such capabilities, functions, and mechanisms include degree of correctness, completeness,
resistance to tampering or bypass, and resistance to direct attack. Assurance requirements
include development processes, procedures, and methodologies as well as the evidence from
development and assessment activities that provide grounds for confidence that the required
functionality is implemented and possesses the required strength of mechanism. [SP 800-160-1]
describes the process of requirements engineering as part of the system development life cycle.
Controls can be viewed as descriptions of the safeguards and protection capabilities appropriate
for achieving the particular security and privacy objectives of the organization and for reflecting
the security and privacy requirements of stakeholders. Controls are selected and implemented in
order to satisfy system requirements and include developer and organizational responsibilities.
Controls can include technical, administrative, and physical aspects. In some cases, the selection
and implementation of a control may necessitate additional specification by the organization in
the form of derived requirements or instantiated control parameter values. The derived
requirements and control parameter values may be necessary to provide the appropriate level of
implementation detail for controls within the system development life cycle.
Security and privacy documentation requirements address all stages of the system development
life cycle. Documentation provides user and administrator guidance for the implementation and
operation of controls. The level of detail required in such documentation is based on the security
categorization or classification level of the system and the degree to which organizations depend
on the capabilities, functions, or mechanisms to meet risk response expectations. Requirements
can include mandated configuration settings that specify allowed functions, ports, protocols, and
services. Acceptance criteria for systems, system components, and system services are defined in
the same manner as the criteria for any organizational acquisition or procurement
ACQUISITION PROCESS | FUNCTIONAL PROPERTIES OF CONTROLS
Require the developer of the system, system component, or system service to provide a
description of the functional properties of the controls to be implemented.
Discussion: Functional properties of security and privacy controls describe the functionality
(i.e., security or privacy capability, functions, or mechanisms) visible at the interfaces of the
controls and specifically exclude functionality and data structures internal to the operation
of the controls
ACQUISITION PROCESS | DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION INFORMATION FOR CONTROLS
Require the developer of the system, system component, or system service to provide
design and implementation information for the controls that includes: [Selection (one or
more): security-relevant external system interfaces; high-level design; low-level design;
source code or hardware schematics; [Assignment: organization-defined design and
implementation information]] at [Assignment: organization-defined level of detail].
Discussion: Organizations may require different levels of detail in the documentation for the
design and implementation of controls in organizational systems, system components, or
system services based on mission and business requirements, requirements for resiliency
and trustworthiness, and requirements for analysis and testing. Systems can be partitioned
into multiple subsystems. Each subsystem within the system can contain one or more
modules. The high-level design for the system is expressed in terms of subsystems and the
interfaces between subsystems providing security-relevant functionality. The low-level
design for the system is expressed in terms of modules and the interfaces between modules
providing security-relevant functionality. Design and implementation documentation can
include manufacturer, version, serial number, verification hash signature, software libraries
used, date of purchase or download, and the vendor or download source. Source code and
hardware schematics are referred to as the implementation representation of the system.
ACQUISITION PROCESS | DEVELOPMENT METHODS, TECHNIQUES, AND PRACTICES
Require the developer of the system, system component, or system service to
demonstrate the use of a system development life cycle process that includes:
(a) [Assignment: organization-defined systems engineering methods];
(b) [Assignment: organization-defined [Selection (one or more): systems security; privacy]
engineering methods]; and
(c) [Assignment: organization-defined software development methods; testing,
evaluation, assessment, verification, and validation methods; and quality control
processes].
Discussion: Following a system development life cycle that includes state-of-the-practice
software development methods, systems engineering methods, systems security and privacy
engineering methods, and quality control processes helps to reduce the number and severity
of latent errors within systems, system components, and system services. Reducing the
number and severity of such errors reduces the number of vulnerabilities in those systems,
components, and services. Transparency in the methods and techniques that developers
select and implement for systems engineering, systems security and privacy engineering,
software development, component and system assessments, and quality control processes
provides an increased level of assurance in the trustworthiness of the system, system
component, or system service being acquired.
ACQUISITION PROCESS | ASSIGNMENT OF COMPONENTS TO SYSTEMS
ACQUISITION PROCESS | SYSTEM, COMPONENT, AND SERVICE CONFIGURATIONS
Require the developer of the system, system component, or system service to:
(a) Deliver the system, component, or service with [Assignment: organization-defined
security configurations] implemented; and
(b) Use the configurations as the default for any subsequent system, component, or
service reinstallation or upgrade.
Discussion: Examples of security configurations include the U.S. Government Configuration
Baseline (USGCB), Security Technical Implementation Guides (STIGs), and any limitations on
functions, ports, protocols, and services. Security characteristics can include requiring that
default passwords have been changed
ACQUISITION PROCESS | USE OF INFORMATION ASSURANCE PRODUCTS
(a) Employ only government off-the-shelf or commercial off-the-shelf information
assurance and information assurance-enabled information technology products that
compose an NSA-approved solution to protect classified information when the
networks used to transmit the information are at a lower classification level than the
information being transmitted; and
(b) Ensure that these products have been evaluated and/or validated by NSA or in
accordance with NSA-approved procedures.
Discussion: Commercial off-the-shelf IA or IA-enabled information technology products used
to protect classified information by cryptographic means may be required to use NSAapproved key management. See [NSA CSFC].
ACQUISITION PROCESS | NIAP-APPROVED PROTECTION PROFILES
(a) Limit the use of commercially provided information assurance and information
assurance-enabled information technology products to those products that have been
successfully evaluated against a National Information Assurance partnership (NIAP)-
approved Protection Profile for a specific technology type, if such a profile exists; and
(b) Require, if no NIAP-approved Protection Profile exists for a specific technology type
but a commercially provided information technology product relies on cryptographic
functionality to enforce its security policy, that the cryptographic module is FIPSvalidated or NSA-approved.
Discussion: See [NIAP CCEVS] for additional information on NIAP. See [NIST CMVP] for
additional information on FIPS-validated cryptographic modules.
ACQUISITION PROCESS | CONTINUOUS MONITORING PLAN FOR CONTROLS
Require the developer of the system, system component, or system service to produce a
plan for continuous monitoring of control effectiveness that is consistent with the
continuous monitoring program of the organization.
Discussion: The objective of continuous monitoring plans is to determine if the planned,
required, and deployed controls within the system, system component, or system service
continue to be effective over time based on the inevitable changes that occur. Developer
continuous monitoring plans include a sufficient level of detail such that the information can
be incorporated into continuous monitoring programs implemented by organizations.
Continuous monitoring plans can include the types of control assessment and monitoring
activities planned, frequency of control monitoring, and actions to be taken when controls
fail or become ineffective.
ACQUISITION PROCESS | FUNCTIONS, PORTS, PROTOCOLS, AND SERVICES IN USE
Require the developer of the system, system component, or system service to identify the
functions, ports, protocols, and services intended for organizational use.
Discussion: The identification of functions, ports, protocols, and services early in the system
development life cycle (e.g., during the initial requirements definition and design stages)
allows organizations to influence the design of the system, system component, or system
service. This early involvement in the system development life cycle helps organizations
avoid or minimize the use of functions, ports, protocols, or services that pose unnecessarily
high risks and understand the trade-offs involved in blocking specific ports, protocols, or
services or requiring system service providers to do so. Early identification of functions,
ports, protocols, and services avoids costly retrofitting of controls after the system,
component, or system service has been implemented. SA-9 describes the requirements for
external system services. Organizations identify which functions, ports, protocols, and
services are provided from external sources.
ACQUISITION PROCESS | USE OF APPROVED PIV PRODUCTS
Employ only information technology products on the FIPS 201-approved products list for
Personal Identity Verification (PIV) capability implemented within organizational systems.
Discussion: Products on the FIPS 201-approved products list meet NIST requirements for
Personal Identity Verification (PIV) of Federal Employees and Contractors. PIV cards are used
for multi-factor authentication in systems and organizations
ACQUISITION PROCESS | SYSTEM OF RECORDS
Include [Assignment: organization-defined Privacy Act requirements] in the acquisition
contract for the operation of a system of records on behalf of an organization to
accomplish an organizational mission or function.
Discussion: When, by contract, an organization provides for the operation of a system of
records to accomplish an organizational mission or function, the organization, consistent
with its authority, causes the requirements of the [PRIVACT] to be applied to the system of
records.
ACQUISITION PROCESS | DATA OWNERSHIP
(a) Include organizational data ownership requirements in the acquisition contract; and
(b) Require all data to be removed from the contractor’s system and returned to the
organization within [Assignment: organization-defined time frame].
Discussion: Contractors who operate a system that contains data owned by an organization
initiating the contract have policies and procedures in place to remove the data from their
systems and/or return the data in a time frame defined by the contract
EXTERNAL SYSTEM SERVICES
Control:
a. Require that providers of external system services comply with organizational security and
privacy requirements and employ the following controls: [Assignment: organization-defined
controls];
b. Define and document organizational oversight and user roles and responsibilities with regard
to external system services; and
c. Employ the following processes, methods, and techniques to monitor control compliance by
external service providers on an ongoing basis: [Assignment: organization-defined processes,
methods, and techniques].
Discussion: External system services are provided by an external provider, and the organization
has no direct control over the implementation of the required controls or the assessment of
control effectiveness. Organizations establish relationships with external service providers in a
variety of ways, including through business partnerships, contracts, interagency agreements,
lines of business arrangements, licensing agreements, joint ventures, and supply chain
exchanges. The responsibility for managing risks from the use of external system services
remains with authorizing officials. For services external to organizations, a chain of trust requires
that organizations establish and retain a certain level of confidence that each provider in the
consumer-provider relationship provides adequate protection for the services rendered. The
extent and nature of this chain of trust vary based on relationships between organizations and
the external providers. Organizations document the basis for the trust relationships so that the
relationships can be monitored. External system services documentation includes government,
service providers, end user security roles and responsibilities, and service-level agreements.
Service-level agreements define the expectations of performance for implemented controls,
describe measurable outcomes, and identify remedies and response requirements for identified
instances of noncompliance.
EXTERNAL SYSTEM SERVICES | RISK ASSESSMENTS AND ORGANIZATIONAL APPROVALS
(a) Conduct an organizational assessment of risk prior to the acquisition or outsourcing of
information security services; and
(b) Verify that the acquisition or outsourcing of dedicated information security services is
approved by [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles].
Discussion: Information security services include the operation of security devices, such as
firewalls or key management services as well as incident monitoring, analysis, and response.
Risks assessed can include system, mission or business, security, privacy, or supply chain
risks.
EXTERNAL SYSTEM SERVICES | IDENTIFICATION OF FUNCTIONS, PORTS, PROTOCOLS, AND SERVICES
Require providers of the following external system services to identify the functions, ports,
protocols, and other services required for the use of such services: [Assignment:
organization-defined external system services].
Discussion: Information from external service providers regarding the specific functions,
ports, protocols, and services used in the provision of such services can be useful when the
need arises to understand the trade-offs involved in restricting certain functions and services
or blocking certain ports and protocols.
EXTERNAL SYSTEM SERVICES | ESTABLISH AND MAINTAIN TRUST RELATIONSHIP WITH PROVIDERS
Establish, document, and maintain trust relationships with external service providers
based on the following requirements, properties, factors, or conditions: [Assignment:
organization-defined security and privacy requirements, properties, factors, or conditions
defining acceptable trust relationships].
Discussion: Trust relationships between organizations and external service providers reflect
the degree of confidence that the risk from using external services is at an acceptable level.
Trust relationships can help organizations gain increased levels of confidence that service
providers are providing adequate protection for the services rendered and can also be useful
when conducting incident response or when planning for upgrades or obsolescence. Trust
relationships can be complicated due to the potentially large number of entities participating
in the consumer-provider interactions, subordinate relationships and levels of trust, and
types of interactions between the parties. In some cases, the degree of trust is based on the
level of control that organizations can exert on external service providers regarding the
controls necessary for the protection of the service, information, or individual privacy and
the evidence brought forth as to the effectiveness of the implemented controls. The level of
control is established by the terms and conditions of the contracts or service-level
agreements
EXTERNAL SYSTEM SERVICES |CONSISTENT INTERESTS OF CONSUMERS AND PROVIDERS
Take the following actions to verify that the interests of [Assignment: organizationdefined external service providers] are consistent with and reflect organizational interests:
[Assignment: organization-defined actions].
Discussion: As organizations increasingly use external service providers, it is possible that
the interests of the service providers may diverge from organizational interests. In such
situations, simply having the required technical, management, or operational controls in
place may not be sufficient if the providers that implement and manage those controls are
not operating in a manner consistent with the interests of the consuming organizations.
Actions that organizations take to address such concerns include requiring background
checks for selected service provider personnel; examining ownership records; employing
only trustworthy service providers, such as providers with which organizations have had
successful trust relationships; and conducting routine, periodic, unscheduled visits to service
provider facilities
EXTERNAL SYSTEM SERVICES | PROCESSING, STORAGE, AND SERVICE LOCATION
Restrict the location of [Selection (one or more): information processing; information or
data; system services] to [Assignment: organization-defined locations] based on
[Assignment: organization-defined requirements or conditions].
Discussion: The location of information processing, information and data storage, or system
services can have a direct impact on the ability of organizations to successfully execute their
mission and business functions. The impact occurs when external providers control the
location of processing, storage, or services. The criteria that external providers use for the
selection of processing, storage, or service locations may be different from the criteria that
organizations use. For example, organizations may desire that data or information storage
ocations be restricted to certain locations to help facilitate incident response activities in
case of information security incidents or breaches. Incident response activities, including
forensic analyses and after-the-fact investigations, may be adversely affected by the
governing laws, policies, or protocols in the locations where processing and storage occur
and/or the locations from which system services emanate.
EXTERNAL SYSTEM SERVICES | ORGANIZATION-CONTROLLED CRYPTOGRAPHIC KEYS
Maintain exclusive control of cryptographic keys for encrypted material stored or
transmitted through an external system.
Discussion: Maintaining exclusive control of cryptographic keys in an external system
prevents decryption of organizational data by external system staff. Organizational control
of cryptographic keys can be implemented by encrypting and decrypting data inside the
organization as data is sent to and received from the external system or by employing a
component that permits encryption and decryption functions to be local to the external
system but allows exclusive organizational access to the encryption keys.
EXTERNAL SYSTEM SERVICES | ORGANIZATION-CONTROLLED INTEGRITY CHECKING
Provide the capability to check the integrity of information while it resides in the external
system.
Discussion: Storage of organizational information in an external system could limit visibility
into the security status of its data. The ability of the organization to verify and validate the
integrity of its stored data without transferring it out of the external system provides such
visibility.
EXTERNAL SYSTEM SERVICES | PROCESSING AND STORAGE LOCATION — U.S. JURISDICTION
Restrict the geographic location of information processing and data storage to facilities
located within in the legal jurisdictional boundary of the United States.
Discussion: The geographic location of information processing and data storage can have a
direct impact on the ability of organizations to successfully execute their mission and
business functions. A compromise or breach of high impact information and systems can
have severe or catastrophic adverse impacts on organizational assets and operations,
individuals, other organizations, and the Nation. Restricting the processing and storage of
high-impact information to facilities within the legal jurisdictional boundary of the United
States provides greater control over such processing and storage
SYSTEM MONITORING
Control:
a. Monitor the system to detect:
1. Attacks and indicators of potential attacks in accordance with the following monitoring
objectives: [Assignment: organization-defined monitoring objectives]; and
2. Unauthorized local, network, and remote connections;
b. Identify unauthorized use of the system through the following techniques and methods:
[Assignment: organization-defined techniques and methods];
c. Invoke internal monitoring capabilities or deploy monitoring devices:
1. Strategically within the system to collect organization-determined essential information;
and
2. At ad hoc locations within the system to track specific types of transactions of interest
to the organization;
d. Analyze detected events and anomalies;
e. Adjust the level of system monitoring activity when there is a change in risk to organizational
operations and assets, individuals, other organizations, or the Nation;
f. Obtain legal opinion regarding system monitoring activities; and
g. Provide [Assignment: organization-defined system monitoring information] to [Assignment:
organization-defined personnel or roles] [Selection (one or more): as needed; [Assignment:
organization-defined frequency]].
Discussion: System monitoring includes external and internal monitoring. External monitoring
includes the observation of events occurring at external interfaces to the system. Internal
monitoring includes the observation of events occurring within the system. Organizations
monitor systems by observing audit activities in real time or by observing other system aspects
such as access patterns, characteristics of access, and other actions. The monitoring objectives
guide and inform the determination of the events. System monitoring capabilities are achieved
through a variety of tools and techniques, including intrusion detection and prevention systems,
malicious code protection software, scanning tools, audit record monitoring software, and
network monitoring software.
Depending on the security architecture, the distribution and configuration of monitoring devices
may impact throughput at key internal and external boundaries as well as at other locations
across a network due to the introduction of network throughput latency. If throughput
management is needed, such devices are strategically located and deployed as part of an
established organization-wide security architecture. Strategic locations for monitoring devices
include selected perimeter locations and near key servers and server farms that support critical
applications. Monitoring devices are typically employed at the managed interfaces associated
with controls SC-7 and AC-17. The information collected is a function of the organizational
monitoring objectives and the capability of systems to support such objectives. Specific types of
transactions of interest include Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) traffic that bypasses HTTP
proxies. System monitoring is an integral part of organizational continuous monitoring and
incident response programs, and output from system monitoring serves as input to those
programs. System monitoring requirements, including the need for specific types of system
monitoring, may be referenced in other controls
Adjustments to levels of system monitoring are based on law enforcement information,
intelligence information, or other sources of information. The legality of system monitoring
activities is based on applicable laws, executive orders, directives, regulations, policies,
standards, and guidelines.
SYSTEM MONITORING | SYSTEM-WIDE INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM
Connect and configure individual intrusion detection tools into a system-wide intrusion
detection system.
Discussion: Linking individual intrusion detection tools into a system-wide intrusion
detection system provides additional coverage and effective detection capabilities. The
information contained in one intrusion detection tool can be shared widely across the
organization, making the system-wide detection capability more robust and powerful.
SYSTEM MONITORING | AUTOMATED TOOLS AND MECHANISMS FOR REAL-TIME ANALYSIS
Employ automated tools and mechanisms to support near real-time analysis of events.
Discussion: Automated tools and mechanisms include host-based, network-based,
transport-based, or storage-based event monitoring tools and mechanisms or security
information and event management (SIEM) technologies that provide real-time analysis of
alerts and notifications generated by organizational systems. Automated monitoring
techniques can create unintended privacy risks because automated controls may connect to
external or otherwise unrelated systems. The matching of records between these systems
may create linkages with unintended consequences. Organizations assess and document
these risks in their privacy impact assessment and make determinations that are in
alignment with their privacy program plan.
SYSTEM MONITORING | AUTOMATED TOOL AND MECHANISM INTEGRATION
Employ automated tools and mechanisms to integrate intrusion detection tools and
mechanisms into access control and flow control mechanisms.
Discussion: Using automated tools and mechanisms to integrate intrusion detection tools
and mechanisms into access and flow control mechanisms facilitates a rapid response to
attacks by enabling the reconfiguration of mechanisms in support of attack isolation and
elimination.
SYSTEM MONITORING | INBOUND AND OUTBOUND COMMUNICATIONS TRAFFIC
(a) Determine criteria for unusual or unauthorized activities or conditions for inbound
and outbound communications traffic;
(b) Monitor inbound and outbound communications traffic [Assignment: organizationdefined frequency] for [Assignment: organization-defined unusual or unauthorized
activities or conditions].
Discussion: Unusual or unauthorized activities or conditions related to system inbound and
outbound communications traffic includes internal traffic that indicates the presence of
malicious code or unauthorized use of legitimate code or credentials within organizational
systems or propagating among system components, signaling to external systems, and the
unauthorized exporting of information. Evidence of malicious code or unauthorized use of
legitimate code or credentials is used to identify potentially compromised systems or system
components.
SYSTEM MONITORING | SYSTEM-GENERATED ALERTS
Alert [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles] when the following systemgenerated indications of compromise or potential compromise occur: [Assignment:
organization-defined compromise indicators].
Discussion: Alerts may be generated from a variety of sources, including audit records or
inputs from malicious code protection mechanisms, intrusion detection or prevention
mechanisms, or boundary protection devices such as firewalls, gateways, and routers. Alerts
can be automated and may be transmitted telephonically, by electronic mail messages, or by
text messaging. Organizational personnel on the alert notification list can include system
administrators, mission or business owners, system owners, information owners/stewards,
senior agency information security officers, senior agency officials for privacy, system
security officers, or privacy officers. In contrast to alerts generated by the system, alerts
generated by organizations in SI-4(12) focus on information sources external to the system,
such as suspicious activity reports and reports on potential insider threats.
SYSTEM MONITORING | AUTOMATED RESPONSE TO SUSPICIOUS EVENTS
(a) Notify [Assignment: organization-defined incident response personnel (identified by
name and/or by role)] of detected suspicious events; and
(b) Take the following actions upon detection: [Assignment: organization-defined leastdisruptive actions to terminate suspicious events].
Discussion: Least-disruptive actions include initiating requests for human responses.
SYSTEM MONITORING | TESTING OF MONITORING TOOLS AND MECHANISMS
Test intrusion-monitoring tools and mechanisms [Assignment: organization-defined
frequency].
Discussion: Testing intrusion-monitoring tools and mechanisms is necessary to ensure that
the tools and mechanisms are operating correctly and continue to satisfy the monitoring
objectives of organizations. The frequency and depth of testing depends on the types of
tools and mechanisms used by organizations and the methods of deployment.
SYSTEM MONITORING | VISIBILITY OF ENCRYPTED COMMUNICATIONS
Make provisions so that [Assignment: organization-defined encrypted communications
traffic] is visible to [Assignment: organization-defined system monitoring tools and
mechanisms].
Discussion: Organizations balance the need to encrypt communications traffic to protect
data confidentiality with the need to maintain visibility into such traffic from a monitoring
perspective. Organizations determine whether the visibility requirement applies to internal
encrypted traffic, encrypted traffic intended for external destinations, or a subset of the
traffic types.
SYSTEM MONITORING | ANALYZE COMMUNICATIONS TRAFFIC ANOMALIES
Analyze outbound communications traffic at the external interfaces to the system and
selected [Assignment: organization-defined interior points within the system] to discover
anomalies.
Discussion: Organization-defined interior points include subnetworks and subsystems.
Anomalies within organizational systems include large file transfers, long-time persistent
connections, attempts to access information from unexpected locations, the use of unusual
protocols and ports, the use of unmonitored network protocols (e.g., IPv6 usage during IPv4
transition), and attempted communications with suspected malicious external addresses.
) SYSTEM MONITORING | AUTOMATED ORGANIZATION-GENERATED ALERTS
Alert [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles] using [Assignment:
organization-defined automated mechanisms] when the following indications of
inappropriate or unusual activities with security or privacy implications occur:
[Assignment: organization-defined activities that trigger alerts].
Discussion: Organizational personnel on the system alert notification list include system
administrators, mission or business owners, system owners, senior agency information
security officer, senior agency official for privacy, system security officers, or privacy officers.
Automated organization-generated alerts are the security alerts generated by organizations
and transmitted using automated means. The sources for organization-generated alerts are
focused on other entities such as suspicious activity reports and reports on potential insider
threats. In contrast to alerts generated by the organization, alerts generated by the system
in SI-4(5) focus on information sources that are internal to the systems, such as audit
records.
SYSTEM MONITORING | ANALYZE TRAFFIC AND EVENT PATTERNS
(a) Analyze communications traffic and event patterns for the system;
(b) Develop profiles representing common traffic and event patterns; and
(c) Use the traffic and event profiles in tuning system-monitoring devices.
Discussion: Identifying and understanding common communications traffic and event
patterns help organizations provide useful information to system monitoring devices to
more effectively identify suspicious or anomalous traffic and events when they occur. Such
information can help reduce the number of false positives and false negatives during system
monitoring
SYSTEM MONITORING | WIRELESS INTRUSION DETECTION
Employ a wireless intrusion detection system to identify rogue wireless devices and to
detect attack attempts and potential compromises or breaches to the system.
Discussion: Wireless signals may radiate beyond organizational facilities. Organizations
proactively search for unauthorized wireless connections, including the conduct of thorough
scans for unauthorized wireless access points. Wireless scans are not limited to those areas
within facilities containing systems but also include areas outside of facilities to verify that
unauthorized wireless access points are not connected to organizational systems.
SYSTEM MONITORING | WIRELESS TO WIRELINE COMMUNICATIONS
Employ an intrusion detection system to monitor wireless communications traffic as the
traffic passes from wireless to wireline networks.
Discussion: Wireless networks are inherently less secure than wired networks. For example,
wireless networks are more susceptible to eavesdroppers or traffic analysis than wireline
networks. When wireless to wireline communications exist, the wireless network could
become a port of entry into the wired network. Given the greater facility of unauthorized
network access via wireless access points compared to unauthorized wired network access
from within the physical boundaries of the system, additional monitoring of transitioning
traffic between wireless and wired networks may be necessary to detect malicious activities.
Employing intrusion detection systems to monitor wireless communications traffic helps to
ensure that the traffic does not contain malicious code prior to transitioning to the wireline
network.
SYSTEM MONITORING | CORRELATE MONITORING INFORMATION
Correlate information from monitoring tools and mechanisms employed throughout the
system.
Discussion: Correlating information from different system monitoring tools and mechanisms
can provide a more comprehensive view of system activity. Correlating system monitoring
tools and mechanisms that typically work in isolation—including malicious code protection
software, host monitoring, and network monitoring—can provide an organization-wide
monitoring view and may reveal otherwise unseen attack patterns. Understanding the
capabilities and limitations of diverse monitoring tools and mechanisms and how to
maximize the use of information generated by those tools and mechanisms can help
organizations develop, operate, and maintain effective monitoring programs. The correlation
of monitoring information is especially important during the transition from older to newer
technologies (e.g., transitioning from IPv4 to IPv6 network protocols)
SYSTEM MONITORING | INTEGRATED SITUATIONAL AWARENESS
Correlate information from monitoring physical, cyber, and supply chain activities to
achieve integrated, organization-wide situational awareness.
Discussion: Correlating monitoring information from a more diverse set of information
sources helps to achieve integrated situational awareness. Integrated situational awareness
from a combination of physical, cyber, and supply chain monitoring activities enhances the
capability of organizations to more quickly detect sophisticated attacks and investigate the
methods and techniques employed to carry out such attacks. In contrast to SI-4(16), which
correlates the various cyber monitoring information, integrated situational awareness is
intended to correlate monitoring beyond the cyber domain. Correlation of monitoring
information from multiple activities may help reveal attacks on organizations that are
operating across multiple attack vectors.
SYSTEM MONITORING | ANALYZE TRAFFIC AND COVERT EXFILTRATION
Analyze outbound communications traffic at external interfaces to the system and at the
following interior points to detect covert exfiltration of information: [Assignment:
organization-defined interior points within the system].
Discussion: Organization-defined interior points include subnetworks and subsystems.
Covert means that can be used to exfiltrate information include steganography.
SYSTEM MONITORING | RISK FOR INDIVIDUALS
Implement [Assignment: organization-defined additional monitoring] of individuals who
have been identified by [Assignment: organization-defined sources] as posing an increased
level of risk.
Discussion: Indications of increased risk from individuals can be obtained from different
sources, including personnel records, intelligence agencies, law enforcement organizations,
and other sources. The monitoring of individuals is coordinated with the management, legal,
security, privacy, and human resource officials who conduct such monitoring. Monitoring is
conducted in accordance with applicable laws, executive orders, directives, regulations,
policies, standards, and guidelines
SYSTEM MONITORING | PRIVILEGED USERS
Implement the following additional monitoring of privileged users: [Assignment:
organization-defined additional monitoring].
Discussion: Privileged users have access to more sensitive information, including securityrelated information, than the general user population. Access to such information means
that privileged users can potentially do greater damage to systems and organizations than
non-privileged users. Therefore, implementing additional monitoring on privileged users
helps to ensure that organizations can identify malicious activity at the earliest possible time
and take appropriate actions.
SYSTEM MONITORING | PROBATIONARY PERIODS
Implement the following additional monitoring of individuals during [Assignment:
organization-defined probationary period]: [Assignment: organization-defined additional
monitoring].
Discussion: During probationary periods, employees do not have permanent employment
status within organizations. Without such status or access to information that is resident on
the system, additional monitoring can help identify any potentially malicious activity or
inappropriate behavior.
) SYSTEM MONITORING | UNAUTHORIZED NETWORK SERVICES
(a) Detect network services that have not been authorized or approved by [Assignment:
organization-defined authorization or approval processes]; and
(b) [Selection (one or more): Audit; Alert [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or
roles]] when detected.
Discussion: Unauthorized or unapproved network services include services in serviceoriented architectures that lack organizational verification or validation and may therefore
be unreliable or serve as malicious rogues for valid services.
SYSTEM MONITORING | HOST-BASED DEVICES
Implement the following host-based monitoring mechanisms at [Assignment:
organization-defined system components]: [Assignment: organization-defined host-based
monitoring mechanisms].
Discussion: Host-based monitoring collects information about the host (or system in which it
resides). System components in which host-based monitoring can be implemented include
servers, notebook computers, and mobile devices. Organizations may consider employing
host-based monitoring mechanisms from multiple product developers or vendors.
) SYSTEM MONITORING | INDICATORS OF COMPROMISE
Discover, collect, and distribute to [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles],
indicators of compromise provided by [Assignment: organization-defined sources].
Discussion: Indicators of compromise (IOC) are forensic artifacts from intrusions that are
identified on organizational systems at the host or network level. IOCs provide valuable
information on systems that have been compromised. IOCs can include the creation of
registry key values. IOCs for network traffic include Universal Resource Locator or protocol
elements that indicate malicious code command and control servers. The rapid distribution
and adoption of IOCs can improve information security by reducing the time that systems
and organizations are vulnerable to the same exploit or attack. Threat indicators, signatures,
tactics, techniques, procedures, and other indicators of compromise may be available via
government and non-government cooperatives, including the Forum of Incident Response
and Security Teams, the United States Computer Emergency Readiness Team, the Defense
Industrial Base Cybersecurity Information Sharing Program, and the CERT Coordination
Center
SYSTEM MONITORING | OPTIMIZE NETWORK TRAFFIC ANALYSIS
Provide visibility into network traffic at external and key internal system interfaces to
optimize the effectiveness of monitoring devices.
Discussion: Encrypted traffic, asymmetric routing architectures, capacity and latency
limitations, and transitioning from older to newer technologies (e.g., IPv4 to IPv6 network
protocol transition) may result in blind spots for organizations when analyzing network
traffic. Collecting, decrypting, pre-processing, and distributing only relevant traffic to
monitoring devices can streamline the efficiency and use of devices and optimize traffic
analysis.