DE.CM-7: Monitoring for unauthorized personnel, connections, devices, and software is performed
AUDIT RECORD GENERATION
Control:
a. Provide audit record generation capability for the event types the system is capable of
auditing as defined in AU-2a on [Assignment: organization-defined system components];
b. Allow [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles] to select the event types that
are to be logged by specific components of the system; and
c. Generate audit records for the event types defined in AU-2c that include the audit record
content defined in AU-3.
Discussion: Audit records can be generated from many different system components. The event
types specified in AU-2d are the event types for which audit logs are to be generated and are a
subset of all event types for which the system can generate audit records.
AUDIT RECORD GENERATION | SYSTEM-WIDE AND TIME-CORRELATED AUDIT TRAIL
Compile audit records from [Assignment: organization-defined system components] into a
system-wide (logical or physical) audit trail that is time-correlated to within [Assignment:
organization-defined level of tolerance for the relationship between time stamps of
individual records in the audit trail].
Discussion: Audit trails are time-correlated if the time stamps in the individual audit records
can be reliably related to the time stamps in other audit records to achieve a time ordering
of the records within organizational tolerances.
AUDIT RECORD GENERATION | STANDARDIZED FORMATS
Produce a system-wide (logical or physical) audit trail composed of audit records in a
standardized format.
Discussion: Audit records that follow common standards promote interoperability and
information exchange between devices and systems. Promoting interoperability and
information exchange facilitates the production of event information that can be readily
analyzed and correlated. If logging mechanisms do not conform to standardized formats,
systems may convert individual audit records into standardized formats when compiling
system-wide audit trails
AUDIT RECORD GENERATION | CHANGES BY AUTHORIZED INDIVIDUALS
Provide and implement the capability for [Assignment: organization-defined individuals or
roles] to change the logging to be performed on [Assignment: organization-defined system
components] based on [Assignment: organization-defined selectable event criteria] within
[Assignment: organization-defined time thresholds].
Discussion: Permitting authorized individuals to make changes to system logging enables
organizations to extend or limit logging as necessary to meet organizational requirements.
Logging that is limited to conserve system resources may be extended (either temporarily or
permanently) to address certain threat situations. In addition, logging may be limited to a
specific set of event types to facilitate audit reduction, analysis, and reporting. Organizations
can establish time thresholds in which logging actions are changed (e.g., near real-time,
within minutes, or within hours).
AUDIT RECORD GENERATION | QUERY PARAMETER AUDITS OF PERSONALLY IDENTIFIABLE
INFORMATION
Provide and implement the capability for auditing the parameters of user query events for
data sets containing personally identifiable information.
Discussion: Query parameters are explicit criteria that an individual or automated system
submits to a system to retrieve data. Auditing of query parameters for datasets that contain
personally identifiable information augments the capability of an organization to track and
understand the access, usage, or sharing of personally identifiable information by authorized
personnel.
CONTINUOUS MONITORING
Control: Develop a system-level continuous monitoring strategy and implement continuous
monitoring in accordance with the organization-level continuous monitoring strategy that
includes:
a. Establishing the following system-level metrics to be monitored: [Assignment: organizationdefined system-level metrics];
b. Establishing [Assignment: organization-defined frequencies] for monitoring and
[Assignment: organization-defined frequencies] for assessment of control effectiveness;
c. Ongoing control assessments in accordance with the continuous monitoring strategy;
d. Ongoing monitoring of system and organization-defined metrics in accordance with the
continuous monitoring strategy;
e. Correlation and analysis of information generated by control assessments and monitoring;
f. Response actions to address results of the analysis of control assessment and monitoring
information; and
g. Reporting the security and privacy status of the system to [Assignment: organizationdefined personnel or roles] [Assignment: organization-defined frequency].
Discussion: Continuous monitoring at the system level facilitates ongoing awareness of the
system security and privacy posture to support organizational risk management decisions. The
terms “continuous” and “ongoing” imply that organizations assess and monitor their controls
and risks at a frequency sufficient to support risk-based decisions. Different types of controls may
require different monitoring frequencies. The results of continuous monitoring generate risk
response actions by organizations. When monitoring the effectiveness of multiple controls that
have been grouped into capabilities, a root-cause analysis may be needed to determine the
specific control that has failed. Continuous monitoring programs allow organizations to maintain
the authorizations of systems and common controls in highly dynamic environments of operation
with changing mission and business needs, threats, vulnerabilities, and technologies. Having
access to security and privacy information on a continuing basis through reports and dashboards
gives organizational officials the ability to make effective and timely risk management decisions,
including ongoing authorization decisions.
Automation supports more frequent updates to hardware, software, and firmware inventories,
authorization packages, and other system information. Effectiveness is further enhanced when
continuous monitoring outputs are formatted to provide information that is specific, measurable,
actionable, relevant, and timely. Continuous monitoring activities are scaled in accordance with
the security categories of systems. Monitoring requirements, including the need for specific
monitoring, may be referenced in other controls and control enhancements,
CONTINUOUS MONITORING | INDEPENDENT ASSESSMENT
Employ independent assessors or assessment teams to monitor the controls in the system
on an ongoing basis.
Discussion: Organizations maximize the value of control assessments by requiring that
assessments be conducted by assessors with appropriate levels of independence. The level
of required independence is based on organizational continuous monitoring strategies.
Assessor independence provides a degree of impartiality to the monitoring process. To
achieve such impartiality, assessors do not create a mutual or conflicting interest with the
organizations where the assessments are being conducted, assess their own work, act as
management or employees of the organizations they are serving, or place themselves in
advocacy positions for the organizations acquiring their services.
CONTINUOUS MONITORING | TREND ANALYSES
Employ trend analyses to determine if control implementations, the frequency of
continuous monitoring activities, and the types of activities used in the continuous
monitoring process need to be modified based on empirical data.
Discussion: Trend analyses include examining recent threat information that addresses the
types of threat events that have occurred in the organization or the Federal Government,
success rates of certain types of attacks, emerging vulnerabilities in technologies, evolving
social engineering techniques, the effectiveness of configuration settings, results from
multiple control assessments, and findings from Inspectors General or auditors
CONTINUOUS MONITORING | RISK MONITORING
Ensure risk monitoring is an integral part of the continuous monitoring strategy that
includes the following:
(a) Effectiveness monitoring;
(b) Compliance monitoring; and
(c) Change monitoring.
Discussion: Risk monitoring is informed by the established organizational risk tolerance.
Effectiveness monitoring determines the ongoing effectiveness of the implemented risk
response measures. Compliance monitoring verifies that required risk response measures
are implemented. It also verifies that security and privacy requirements are satisfied. Change
monitoring identifies changes to organizational systems and environments of operation that
may affect security and privacy risk.
CONTINUOUS MONITORING | CONSISTENCY ANALYSIS
Employ the following actions to validate that policies are established and implemented
controls are operating in a consistent manner: [Assignment: organization-defined actions].
Discussion: Security and privacy controls are often added incrementally to a system. As a
result, policies for selecting and implementing controls may be inconsistent, and the controls
could fail to work together in a consistent or coordinated manner. At a minimum, the lack of
consistency and coordination could mean that there are unacceptable security and privacy
gaps in the system. At worst, it could mean that some of the controls implemented in one
location or by one component are actually impeding the functionality of other controls (e.g.,
encrypting internal network traffic can impede monitoring). In other situations, failing to
consistently monitor all implemented network protocols (e.g., a dual stack of IPv4 and IPv6)
may create unintended vulnerabilities in the system that could be exploited by adversaries.
It is important to validate—through testing, monitoring, and analysis—that the implemented
controls are operating in a consistent, coordinated, non-interfering manner.
) CONTINUOUS MONITORING | AUTOMATION SUPPORT FOR MONITORING
Ensure the accuracy, currency, and availability of monitoring results for the system using
[Assignment: organization-defined automated mechanisms].
Discussion: Using automated tools for monitoring helps to maintain the accuracy, currency,
and availability of monitoring information which in turns helps to increase the level of
ongoing awareness of the system security and privacy posture in support of organizational
risk management decisions.
CONFIGURATION CHANGE CONTROL
Control:
a. Determine and document the types of changes to the system that are configurationcontrolled;
b. Review proposed configuration-controlled changes to the system and approve or disapprove
such changes with explicit consideration for security and privacy impact analyses;
c. Document configuration change decisions associated with the system;
d. Implement approved configuration-controlled changes to the system;
e. Retain records of configuration-controlled changes to the system for [Assignment:
organization-defined time period];
f. Monitor and review activities associated with configuration-controlled changes to the
system; and
g. Coordinate and provide oversight for configuration change control activities through
[Assignment: organization-defined configuration change control element] that convenes
[Selection (one or more): [Assignment: organization-defined frequency]; when [Assignment:
organization-defined configuration change conditions]].
Discussion: Configuration change control for organizational systems involves the systematic
proposal, justification, implementation, testing, review, and disposition of system changes,
including system upgrades and modifications. Configuration change control includes changes to
baseline configurations, configuration items of systems, operational procedures, configuration
settings for system components, remediate vulnerabilities, and unscheduled or unauthorized
changes. Processes for managing configuration changes to systems include Configuration Control
Boards or Change Advisory Boards that review and approve proposed changes. For changes that
impact privacy risk, the senior agency official for privacy updates privacy impact assessments and
system of records notices. For new systems or major upgrades, organizations consider including
representatives from the development organizations on the Configuration Control Boards or
Change Advisory Boards. Auditing of changes includes activities before and after changes are
made to systems and the auditing activities required to implement such changes
CONFIGURATION CHANGE CONTROL | AUTOMATED DOCUMENTATION, NOTIFICATION, AND
PROHIBITION OF CHANGES
Use [Assignment: organization-defined automated mechanisms] to:
(a) Document proposed changes to the system;
(b) Notify [Assignment: organization-defined approval authorities] of proposed changes
to the system and request change approval;
(c) Highlight proposed changes to the system that have not been approved or
disapproved within [Assignment: organization-defined time period];
(d) Prohibit changes to the system until designated approvals are received;
(e) Document all changes to the system; and
(f) Notify [Assignment: organization-defined personnel] when approved changes to the
system are completed.
CONFIGURATION CHANGE CONTROL | TESTING, VALIDATION, AND DOCUMENTATION OF CHANGES
Test, validate, and document changes to the system before finalizing the implementation
of the changes.
Discussion: Changes to systems include modifications to hardware, software, or firmware
components and configuration settings defined in CM-6. Organizations ensure that testing
does not interfere with system operations that support organizational mission and business
functions. Individuals or groups conducting tests understand security and privacy policies
and procedures, system security and privacy policies and procedures, and the health, safety,
and environmental risks associated with specific facilities or processes. Operational systems
may need to be taken offline, or replicated to the extent feasible, before testing can be
conducted. If systems must be taken offline for testing, the tests are scheduled to occur
during planned system outages whenever possible. If the testing cannot be conducted on
operational systems, organizations employ compensating controls.
CONFIGURATION CHANGE CONTROL | AUTOMATED CHANGE IMPLEMENTATION
Implement changes to the current system baseline and deploy the updated baseline across
the installed base using [Assignment: organization-defined automated mechanisms].
Discussion: Automated tools can improve the accuracy, consistency, and availability of
configuration baseline information. Automation can also provide data aggregation and data
correlation capabilities, alerting mechanisms, and dashboards to support risk-based
decision-making within the organization.
CONFIGURATION CHANGE CONTROL | SECURITY AND PRIVACY REPRESENTATIVES
Require [Assignment: organization-defined security and privacy representatives] to be
members of the [Assignment: organization-defined configuration change control element].
Discussion: Information security and privacy representatives include system security
officers, senior agency information security officers, senior agency officials for privacy, or
system privacy officers. Representation by personnel with information security and privacy
expertise is important because changes to system configurations can have unintended side
effects, some of which may be security- or privacy-relevant. Detecting such changes early in
the process can help avoid unintended, negative consequences that could ultimately affect
the security and privacy posture of systems. The configuration change control element
referred to in the second organization-defined parameter reflects the change control
elements defined by organizations in CM-3g.
CONFIGURATION CHANGE CONTROL | AUTOMATED SECURITY RESPONSE
Implement the following security responses automatically if baseline configurations are
changed in an unauthorized manner: [Assignment: organization-defined security
responses].
Discussion: Automated security responses include halting selected system functions, halting
system processing, and issuing alerts or notifications to organizational personnel when there
is an unauthorized modification of a configuration item.
CONFIGURATION CHANGE CONTROL | CRYPTOGRAPHY MANAGEMENT
Ensure that cryptographic mechanisms used to provide the following controls are under
configuration management: [Assignment: organization-defined controls].
Discussion: The controls referenced in the control enhancement refer to security and
privacy controls from the control catalog. Regardless of the cryptographic mechanisms
employed, processes and procedures are in place to manage those mechanisms. For
example, if system components use certificates for identification and authentication, a
process is implemented to address the expiration of those certificates.
CONFIGURATION CHANGE CONTROL | REVIEW SYSTEM CHANGES
Review changes to the system [Assignment: organization-defined frequency] or when
[Assignment: organization-defined circumstances] to determine whether unauthorized
changes have occurred.
Discussion: Indications that warrant a review of changes to the system and the specific
circumstances justifying such reviews may be obtained from activities carried out by
organizations during the configuration change process or continuous monitoring process
CONFIGURATION CHANGE CONTROL | PREVENT OR RESTRICT CONFIGURATION CHANGES
Prevent or restrict changes to the configuration of the system under the following
circumstances: [Assignment: organization-defined circumstances].
Discussion: System configuration changes can adversely affect critical system security and
privacy functionality. Change restrictions can be enforced through automated mechanisms
SYSTEM COMPONENT INVENTORY
Control:
a. Develop and document an inventory of system components that:
1. Accurately reflects the system;
2. Includes all components within the system;
3. Does not include duplicate accounting of components or components assigned to any
other system;
4. Is at the level of granularity deemed necessary for tracking and reporting; and
5. Includes the following information to achieve system component accountability:
[Assignment: organization-defined information deemed necessary to achieve effective
system component accountability]; and
b. Review and update the system component inventory [Assignment: organization-defined
frequency].
Discussion: System components are discrete, identifiable information technology assets that
include hardware, software, and firmware. Organizations may choose to implement centralized
system component inventories that include components from all organizational systems. In such
situations, organizations ensure that the inventories include system-specific information required
for component accountability. The information necessary for effective accountability of system
components includes the system name, software owners, software version numbers, hardware
inventory specifications, software license information, and for networked components, the
machine names and network addresses across all implemented protocols (e.g., IPv4, IPv6).
Inventory specifications include date of receipt, cost, model, serial number, manufacturer,
supplier information, component type, and physical location.
Preventing duplicate accounting of system components addresses the lack of accountability that
occurs when component ownership and system association is not known, especially in large or
complex connected systems. Effective prevention of duplicate accounting of system components
necessitates use of a unique identifier for each component. For software inventory, centrally
managed software that is accessed via other systems is addressed as a component of the system
on which it is installed and managed. Software installed on multiple organizational systems and
managed at the system level is addressed for each individual system and may appear more than
once in a centralized component inventory, necessitating a system association for each software
instance in the centralized inventory to avoid duplicate accounting of components. Scanning
systems implementing multiple network protocols (e.g., IPv4 and IPv6) can result in duplicate
components being identified in different address spaces. The implementation of CM-8(7) can
help to eliminate duplicate accounting of components.
SYSTEM COMPONENT INVENTORY | UPDATES DURING INSTALLATION AND REMOVAL
Update the inventory of system components as part of component installations, removals,
and system updates.
Discussion: Organizations can improve the accuracy, completeness, and consistency of
system component inventories if the inventories are updated as part of component
installations or removals or during general system updates. If inventories are not updated at
these key times, there is a greater likelihood that the information will not be appropriately
captured and documented. System updates include hardware, software, and firmware
components.
SYSTEM COMPONENT INVENTORY | AUTOMATED MAINTENANCE
Maintain the currency, completeness, accuracy, and availability of the inventory of system
components using [Assignment: organization-defined automated mechanisms].
Discussion: Organizations maintain system inventories to the extent feasible. For example,
virtual machines can be difficult to monitor because such machines are not visible to the
network when not in use. In such cases, organizations maintain as up-to-date, complete, and
accurate an inventory as is deemed reasonable. Automated maintenance can be achieved by
the implementation of CM-2(2) for organizations that combine system component inventory
and baseline configuration activities.
SYSTEM COMPONENT INVENTORY | AUTOMATED UNAUTHORIZED COMPONENT DETECTION
(a) Detect the presence of unauthorized hardware, software, and firmware components
within the system using [Assignment: organization-defined automated mechanisms]
[Assignment: organization-defined frequency]; and
(b) Take the following actions when unauthorized components are detected: [Selection
(one or more): disable network access by such components; isolate the components;
notify [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles]].
Discussion: Automated unauthorized component detection is applied in addition to the
monitoring for unauthorized remote connections and mobile devices. Monitoring for
unauthorized system components may be accomplished on an ongoing basis or by the
periodic scanning of systems for that purpose. Automated mechanisms may also be used to
prevent the connection of unauthorized components (see CM-7(9)). Automated mechanisms
can be implemented in systems or in separate system components. When acquiring and
implementing automated mechanisms, organizations consider whether such mechanisms
depend on the ability of the system component to support an agent or supplicant in order to
be detected since some types of components do not have or cannot support agents (e.g., IoT
devices, sensors). Isolation can be achieved , for example, by placing unauthorized system
components in separate domains or subnets or quarantining such components. This type of
component isolation is commonly referred to as “sandboxing.”
SYSTEM COMPONENT INVENTORY | ACCOUNTABILITY INFORMATION
Include in the system component inventory information, a means for identifying by
[Selection (one or more): name; position; role], individuals responsible and accountable for
administering those components.
Discussion: Identifying individuals who are responsible and accountable for administering
system components ensures that the assigned components are properly administered and
that organizations can contact those individuals if some action is required (e.g., when the
component is determine
SYSTEM COMPONENT INVENTORY | ASSESSED CONFIGURATIONS AND APPROVED DEVIATIONS
Include assessed component configurations and any approved deviations to current
deployed configurations in the system component inventory.
Discussion: Assessed configurations and approved deviations focus on configuration settings
established by organizations for system components, the specific components that have
been assessed to determine compliance with the required configuration settings, and any
approved deviations from established configuration settings.
SYSTEM COMPONENT INVENTORY | CENTRALIZED REPOSITORY
Provide a centralized repository for the inventory of system components
Discussion: Organizations may implement centralized system component inventories that
include components from all organizational systems. Centralized repositories of component
inventories provide opportunities for efficiencies in accounting for organizational hardware,
software, and firmware assets. Such repositories may also help organizations rapidly identify
the location and responsible individuals of components that have been compromised,
breached, or are otherwise in need of mitigation actions. Organizations ensure that the
resulting centralized inventories include system-specific information required for proper
component accountability.
SYSTEM COMPONENT INVENTORY | AUTOMATED LOCATION TRACKING
Support the tracking of system components by geographic location using [Assignment:
organization-defined automated mechanisms].
Discussion: The use of automated mechanisms to track the location of system components
can increase the accuracy of component inventories. Such capability may help organizations
rapidly identify the location and responsible individuals of system components that have
been compromised, breached, or are otherwise in need of mitigation actions. The use of
tracking mechanisms can be coordinated with senior agency officials for privacy if there are
implications that affect individual privacy.
SYSTEM COMPONENT INVENTORY | ASSIGNMENT OF COMPONENTS TO SYSTEMS
(a) Assign system components to a system; and
(b) Receive an acknowledgement from [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or
roles] of this assignment.
Discussion: System components that are not assigned to a system may be unmanaged, lack
the required protection, and become an organizational vulnerability.
PHYSICAL ACCESS CONTROL
Control:
a. Enforce physical access authorizations at [Assignment: organization-defined entry and exit
points to the facility where the system resides] by:
1. Verifying individual access authorizations before granting access to the facility; and
2. Controlling ingress and egress to the facility using [Selection (one or more): [Assignment:
organization-defined physical access control systems or devices]; guards];
b. Maintain physical access audit logs for [Assignment: organization-defined entry or exit
points];
c. Control access to areas within the facility designated as publicly accessible by implementing
the following controls: [Assignment: organization-defined physical access controls];
d. Escort visitors and control visitor activity [Assignment: organization-defined circumstances
requiring visitor escorts and control of visitor activity];
e. Secure keys, combinations, and other physical access devices;
f. Inventory [Assignment: organization-defined physical access devices] every [Assignment:
organization-defined frequency]; and
g. Change combinations and keys [Assignment: organization-defined frequency] and/or when
keys are lost, combinations are compromised, or when individuals possessing the keys or
combinations are transferred or terminated.
Discussion: Physical access control applies to employees and visitors. Individuals with permanent
physical access authorizations are not considered visitors. Physical access controls for publicly
accessible areas may include physical access control logs/records, guards, or physical access
devices and barriers to prevent movement from publicly accessible areas to non-public areas.
Organizations determine the types of guards needed, including professional security staff, system
users, or administrative staff. Physical access devices include keys, locks, combinations, biometric
readers, and card readers. Physical access control systems comply with applicable laws, executive
orders, directives, policies, regulations, standards, and guidelines. Organizations have flexibility in
the types of audit logs employed. Audit logs can be procedural, automated, or some combination
thereof. Physical access points can include facility access points, interior access points to systems
that require supplemental access controls, or both. Components of systems may be in areas
designated as publicly accessible with organizations controlling access to the components.
PHYSICAL ACCESS CONTROL | SYSTEM ACCESS
Enforce physical access authorizations to the system in addition to the physical access
controls for the facility at [Assignment: organization-defined physical spaces containing
one or more components of the system].
Discussion: Control of physical access to the system provides additional physical security for
those areas within facilities where there is a concentration of system components.
PHYSICAL ACCESS CONTROL | FACILITY AND SYSTEMS
Perform security checks [Assignment: organization-defined frequency] at the physical
perimeter of the facility or system for exfiltration of information or removal of system
components.
Discussion: Organizations determine the extent, frequency, and/or randomness of security
checks to adequately mitigate risk associated with exfiltration
PHYSICAL ACCESS CONTROL | CONTINUOUS GUARDS
Employ guards to control [Assignment: organization-defined physical access points] to the
facility where the system resides 24 hours per day, 7 days per week.
Discussion: Employing guards at selected physical access points to the facility provides a
more rapid response capability for organizations. Guards also provide the opportunity for
human surveillance in areas of the facility not covered by video surveillance
PHYSICAL ACCESS CONTROL | LOCKABLE CASINGS
Use lockable physical casings to protect [Assignment: organization-defined system
components] from unauthorized physical access.
Discussion: The greatest risk from the use of portable devices—such as smart phones,
tablets, and notebook computers—is theft. Organizations can employ lockable, physical
casings to reduce or eliminate the risk of equipment theft. Such casings come in a variety of
sizes, from units that protect a single notebook computer to full cabinets that can protect
multiple servers, computers, and peripherals. Lockable physical casings can be used in
conjunction with cable locks or lockdown plates to prevent the theft of the locked casing
containing the computer equipment.
PHYSICAL ACCESS CONTROL | TAMPER PROTECTION
Employ [Assignment: organization-defined anti-tamper technologies] to [Selection (one or
more): detect; prevent] physical tampering or alteration of [Assignment: organizationdefined hardware components] within the system.
Discussion: Organizations can implement tamper detection and prevention at selected
hardware components or implement tamper detection at some components and tamper
prevention at other components. Detection and prevention activities can employ many
types of anti-tamper technologies, including tamper-detection seals and anti-tamper
coatings. Anti-tamper programs help to detect hardware alterations through counterfeiting
and other supply chain-related risks.
PHYSICAL ACCESS CONTROL | PHYSICAL BARRIERS
Limit access using physical barriers.
Discussion: Physical barriers include bollards, concrete slabs, jersey walls, and hydraulic
active vehicle barriers.
PHYSICAL ACCESS CONTROL | ACCESS CONTROL VESTIBULES
Employ access control vestibules at [Assignment: organization-defined locations within the
facility].
Discussion: An access control vestibule is part of a physical access control system that
typically provides a space between two sets of interlocking doors. Vestibules are designed to
prevent unauthorized individuals from following authorized individuals into facilities with
controlled access. This activity, also known as piggybacking or tailgating, results in
unauthorized access to the facility. Interlocking door controllers can be used to limit the
number of individuals who enter controlled access points and to provide containment areas
while authorization for physical access is verified. Interlocking door controllers can be fully
automated (i.e., controlling the opening and closing of the doors) or partially automated
(i.e., using security guards to control the number of individuals entering the containment
area).
MONITORING PHYSICAL ACCESS
Control:
a. Monitor physical access to the facility where the system resides to detect and respond to
physical security incidents;
b. Review physical access logs [Assignment: organization-defined frequency] and upon
occurrence of [Assignment: organization-defined events or potential indications of events];
and
c. Coordinate results of reviews and investigations with the organizational incident response
capability.
Discussion: Physical access monitoring includes publicly accessible areas within organizational
facilities. Examples of physical access monitoring include the employment of guards, video
surveillance equipment (i.e., cameras), and sensor devices. Reviewing physical access logs can
help identify suspicious activity, anomalous events, or potential threats. The reviews can be
supported by audit logging controls, such as AU-2, if the access logs are part of an automated
system. Organizational incident response capabilities include investigations of physical security
incidents and responses to the incidents. Incidents include security violations or suspicious
physical access activities. Suspicious physical access activities include accesses outside of normal
work hours, repeated accesses to areas not normally accessed, accesses for unusual lengths of
time, and out-of-sequence accesses.
MONITORING PHYSICAL ACCESS | INTRUSION ALARMS AND SURVEILLANCE EQUIPMENT
Monitor physical access to the facility where the system resides using physical intrusion
alarms and surveillance equipment.
Discussion: Physical intrusion alarms can be employed to alert security personnel when
unauthorized access to the facility is attempted. Alarm systems work in conjunction with
physical barriers, physical access control systems, and security guards by triggering a
response when these other forms of security have been compromised or breached. Physical
intrusion alarms can include different types of sensor devices, such as motion sensors,
contact sensors, and broken glass sensors. Surveillance equipment includes video cameras
installed at strategic locations throughout the facility.
MONITORING PHYSICAL ACCESS | AUTOMATED INTRUSION RECOGNITION AND RESPONSES
Recognize [Assignment: organization-defined classes or types of intrusions] and initiate
[Assignment: organization-defined response actions] using [Assignment: organizationdefined automated mechanisms].
Discussion: Response actions can include notifying selected organizational personnel or law
enforcement personnel. Automated mechanisms implemented to initiate response actions
include system alert notifications, email and text messages, and activating door locking
mechanisms. Physical access monitoring can be coordinated with intrusion detection
systems and system monitoring capabilities to provide integrated threat coverage for the
organization.
) MONITORING PHYSICAL ACCESS | VIDEO SURVEILLANCE
(a) Employ video surveillance of [Assignment: organization-defined operational areas];
(b) Review video recordings [Assignment: organization-defined frequency]; and
(c) Retain video recordings for [Assignment: organization-defined time period].
Discussion: Video surveillance focuses on recording activity in specified areas for the
purposes of subsequent review, if circumstances so warrant. Video recordings are typically
reviewed to detect anomalous events or incidents. Monitoring the surveillance video is not
required, although organizations may choose to do so. There may be legal considerations
when performing and retaining video surveillance, especially if such surveillance is in a public
location.
MONITORING PHYSICAL ACCESS | MONITORING PHYSICAL ACCESS TO SYSTEMS
Monitor physical access to the system in addition to the physical access monitoring of the
facility at [Assignment: organization-defined physical spaces containing one or more
components of the system].
Discussion: Monitoring physical access to systems provides additional monitoring for those
areas within facilities where there is a concentration of system components, including server
rooms, media storage areas, and communications centers. Physical access monitoring can be
coordinated with intrusion detection systems and system monitoring capabilities to provide
comprehensive and integrated threat coverage for the organization.
ASSET MONITORING AND TRACKING
Control: Employ [Assignment: organization-defined asset location technologies] to track and
monitor the location and movement of [Assignment: organization-defined assets] within
[Assignment: organization-defined controlled areas].
Discussion: Asset location technologies can help ensure that critical assets—including vehicles,
equipment, and system components—remain in authorized locations. Organizations consult with
the Office of the General Counsel and senior agency official for privacy regarding the deployment
and use of asset location technologies to address potential privacy concerns.
SYSTEM MONITORING
Control:
a. Monitor the system to detect:
1. Attacks and indicators of potential attacks in accordance with the following monitoring
objectives: [Assignment: organization-defined monitoring objectives]; and
2. Unauthorized local, network, and remote connections;
b. Identify unauthorized use of the system through the following techniques and methods:
[Assignment: organization-defined techniques and methods];
c. Invoke internal monitoring capabilities or deploy monitoring devices:
1. Strategically within the system to collect organization-determined essential information;
and
2. At ad hoc locations within the system to track specific types of transactions of interest
to the organization;
d. Analyze detected events and anomalies;
e. Adjust the level of system monitoring activity when there is a change in risk to organizational
operations and assets, individuals, other organizations, or the Nation;
f. Obtain legal opinion regarding system monitoring activities; and
g. Provide [Assignment: organization-defined system monitoring information] to [Assignment:
organization-defined personnel or roles] [Selection (one or more): as needed; [Assignment:
organization-defined frequency]].
Discussion: System monitoring includes external and internal monitoring. External monitoring
includes the observation of events occurring at external interfaces to the system. Internal
monitoring includes the observation of events occurring within the system. Organizations
monitor systems by observing audit activities in real time or by observing other system aspects
such as access patterns, characteristics of access, and other actions. The monitoring objectives
guide and inform the determination of the events. System monitoring capabilities are achieved
through a variety of tools and techniques, including intrusion detection and prevention systems,
malicious code protection software, scanning tools, audit record monitoring software, and
network monitoring software.
Depending on the security architecture, the distribution and configuration of monitoring devices
may impact throughput at key internal and external boundaries as well as at other locations
across a network due to the introduction of network throughput latency. If throughput
management is needed, such devices are strategically located and deployed as part of an
established organization-wide security architecture. Strategic locations for monitoring devices
include selected perimeter locations and near key servers and server farms that support critical
applications. Monitoring devices are typically employed at the managed interfaces associated
with controls SC-7 and AC-17. The information collected is a function of the organizational
monitoring objectives and the capability of systems to support such objectives. Specific types of
transactions of interest include Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) traffic that bypasses HTTP
proxies. System monitoring is an integral part of organizational continuous monitoring and
incident response programs, and output from system monitoring serves as input to those
programs. System monitoring requirements, including the need for specific types of system
monitoring, may be referenced in other controls
Adjustments to levels of system monitoring are based on law enforcement information,
intelligence information, or other sources of information. The legality of system monitoring
activities is based on applicable laws, executive orders, directives, regulations, policies,
standards, and guidelines.
SYSTEM MONITORING | SYSTEM-WIDE INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM
Connect and configure individual intrusion detection tools into a system-wide intrusion
detection system.
Discussion: Linking individual intrusion detection tools into a system-wide intrusion
detection system provides additional coverage and effective detection capabilities. The
information contained in one intrusion detection tool can be shared widely across the
organization, making the system-wide detection capability more robust and powerful.
SYSTEM MONITORING | AUTOMATED TOOLS AND MECHANISMS FOR REAL-TIME ANALYSIS
Employ automated tools and mechanisms to support near real-time analysis of events.
Discussion: Automated tools and mechanisms include host-based, network-based,
transport-based, or storage-based event monitoring tools and mechanisms or security
information and event management (SIEM) technologies that provide real-time analysis of
alerts and notifications generated by organizational systems. Automated monitoring
techniques can create unintended privacy risks because automated controls may connect to
external or otherwise unrelated systems. The matching of records between these systems
may create linkages with unintended consequences. Organizations assess and document
these risks in their privacy impact assessment and make determinations that are in
alignment with their privacy program plan.
SYSTEM MONITORING | AUTOMATED TOOL AND MECHANISM INTEGRATION
Employ automated tools and mechanisms to integrate intrusion detection tools and
mechanisms into access control and flow control mechanisms.
Discussion: Using automated tools and mechanisms to integrate intrusion detection tools
and mechanisms into access and flow control mechanisms facilitates a rapid response to
attacks by enabling the reconfiguration of mechanisms in support of attack isolation and
elimination.
SYSTEM MONITORING | INBOUND AND OUTBOUND COMMUNICATIONS TRAFFIC
(a) Determine criteria for unusual or unauthorized activities or conditions for inbound
and outbound communications traffic;
(b) Monitor inbound and outbound communications traffic [Assignment: organizationdefined frequency] for [Assignment: organization-defined unusual or unauthorized
activities or conditions].
Discussion: Unusual or unauthorized activities or conditions related to system inbound and
outbound communications traffic includes internal traffic that indicates the presence of
malicious code or unauthorized use of legitimate code or credentials within organizational
systems or propagating among system components, signaling to external systems, and the
unauthorized exporting of information. Evidence of malicious code or unauthorized use of
legitimate code or credentials is used to identify potentially compromised systems or system
components.
SYSTEM MONITORING | SYSTEM-GENERATED ALERTS
Alert [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles] when the following systemgenerated indications of compromise or potential compromise occur: [Assignment:
organization-defined compromise indicators].
Discussion: Alerts may be generated from a variety of sources, including audit records or
inputs from malicious code protection mechanisms, intrusion detection or prevention
mechanisms, or boundary protection devices such as firewalls, gateways, and routers. Alerts
can be automated and may be transmitted telephonically, by electronic mail messages, or by
text messaging. Organizational personnel on the alert notification list can include system
administrators, mission or business owners, system owners, information owners/stewards,
senior agency information security officers, senior agency officials for privacy, system
security officers, or privacy officers. In contrast to alerts generated by the system, alerts
generated by organizations in SI-4(12) focus on information sources external to the system,
such as suspicious activity reports and reports on potential insider threats.
SYSTEM MONITORING | AUTOMATED RESPONSE TO SUSPICIOUS EVENTS
(a) Notify [Assignment: organization-defined incident response personnel (identified by
name and/or by role)] of detected suspicious events; and
(b) Take the following actions upon detection: [Assignment: organization-defined leastdisruptive actions to terminate suspicious events].
Discussion: Least-disruptive actions include initiating requests for human responses.
SYSTEM MONITORING | TESTING OF MONITORING TOOLS AND MECHANISMS
Test intrusion-monitoring tools and mechanisms [Assignment: organization-defined
frequency].
Discussion: Testing intrusion-monitoring tools and mechanisms is necessary to ensure that
the tools and mechanisms are operating correctly and continue to satisfy the monitoring
objectives of organizations. The frequency and depth of testing depends on the types of
tools and mechanisms used by organizations and the methods of deployment.
SYSTEM MONITORING | VISIBILITY OF ENCRYPTED COMMUNICATIONS
Make provisions so that [Assignment: organization-defined encrypted communications
traffic] is visible to [Assignment: organization-defined system monitoring tools and
mechanisms].
Discussion: Organizations balance the need to encrypt communications traffic to protect
data confidentiality with the need to maintain visibility into such traffic from a monitoring
perspective. Organizations determine whether the visibility requirement applies to internal
encrypted traffic, encrypted traffic intended for external destinations, or a subset of the
traffic types.
SYSTEM MONITORING | ANALYZE COMMUNICATIONS TRAFFIC ANOMALIES
Analyze outbound communications traffic at the external interfaces to the system and
selected [Assignment: organization-defined interior points within the system] to discover
anomalies.
Discussion: Organization-defined interior points include subnetworks and subsystems.
Anomalies within organizational systems include large file transfers, long-time persistent
connections, attempts to access information from unexpected locations, the use of unusual
protocols and ports, the use of unmonitored network protocols (e.g., IPv6 usage during IPv4
transition), and attempted communications with suspected malicious external addresses.
) SYSTEM MONITORING | AUTOMATED ORGANIZATION-GENERATED ALERTS
Alert [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles] using [Assignment:
organization-defined automated mechanisms] when the following indications of
inappropriate or unusual activities with security or privacy implications occur:
[Assignment: organization-defined activities that trigger alerts].
Discussion: Organizational personnel on the system alert notification list include system
administrators, mission or business owners, system owners, senior agency information
security officer, senior agency official for privacy, system security officers, or privacy officers.
Automated organization-generated alerts are the security alerts generated by organizations
and transmitted using automated means. The sources for organization-generated alerts are
focused on other entities such as suspicious activity reports and reports on potential insider
threats. In contrast to alerts generated by the organization, alerts generated by the system
in SI-4(5) focus on information sources that are internal to the systems, such as audit
records.
SYSTEM MONITORING | ANALYZE TRAFFIC AND EVENT PATTERNS
(a) Analyze communications traffic and event patterns for the system;
(b) Develop profiles representing common traffic and event patterns; and
(c) Use the traffic and event profiles in tuning system-monitoring devices.
Discussion: Identifying and understanding common communications traffic and event
patterns help organizations provide useful information to system monitoring devices to
more effectively identify suspicious or anomalous traffic and events when they occur. Such
information can help reduce the number of false positives and false negatives during system
monitoring
SYSTEM MONITORING | WIRELESS INTRUSION DETECTION
Employ a wireless intrusion detection system to identify rogue wireless devices and to
detect attack attempts and potential compromises or breaches to the system.
Discussion: Wireless signals may radiate beyond organizational facilities. Organizations
proactively search for unauthorized wireless connections, including the conduct of thorough
scans for unauthorized wireless access points. Wireless scans are not limited to those areas
within facilities containing systems but also include areas outside of facilities to verify that
unauthorized wireless access points are not connected to organizational systems.
SYSTEM MONITORING | WIRELESS TO WIRELINE COMMUNICATIONS
Employ an intrusion detection system to monitor wireless communications traffic as the
traffic passes from wireless to wireline networks.
Discussion: Wireless networks are inherently less secure than wired networks. For example,
wireless networks are more susceptible to eavesdroppers or traffic analysis than wireline
networks. When wireless to wireline communications exist, the wireless network could
become a port of entry into the wired network. Given the greater facility of unauthorized
network access via wireless access points compared to unauthorized wired network access
from within the physical boundaries of the system, additional monitoring of transitioning
traffic between wireless and wired networks may be necessary to detect malicious activities.
Employing intrusion detection systems to monitor wireless communications traffic helps to
ensure that the traffic does not contain malicious code prior to transitioning to the wireline
network.
SYSTEM MONITORING | CORRELATE MONITORING INFORMATION
Correlate information from monitoring tools and mechanisms employed throughout the
system.
Discussion: Correlating information from different system monitoring tools and mechanisms
can provide a more comprehensive view of system activity. Correlating system monitoring
tools and mechanisms that typically work in isolation—including malicious code protection
software, host monitoring, and network monitoring—can provide an organization-wide
monitoring view and may reveal otherwise unseen attack patterns. Understanding the
capabilities and limitations of diverse monitoring tools and mechanisms and how to
maximize the use of information generated by those tools and mechanisms can help
organizations develop, operate, and maintain effective monitoring programs. The correlation
of monitoring information is especially important during the transition from older to newer
technologies (e.g., transitioning from IPv4 to IPv6 network protocols)
SYSTEM MONITORING | INTEGRATED SITUATIONAL AWARENESS
Correlate information from monitoring physical, cyber, and supply chain activities to
achieve integrated, organization-wide situational awareness.
Discussion: Correlating monitoring information from a more diverse set of information
sources helps to achieve integrated situational awareness. Integrated situational awareness
from a combination of physical, cyber, and supply chain monitoring activities enhances the
capability of organizations to more quickly detect sophisticated attacks and investigate the
methods and techniques employed to carry out such attacks. In contrast to SI-4(16), which
correlates the various cyber monitoring information, integrated situational awareness is
intended to correlate monitoring beyond the cyber domain. Correlation of monitoring
information from multiple activities may help reveal attacks on organizations that are
operating across multiple attack vectors.
SYSTEM MONITORING | ANALYZE TRAFFIC AND COVERT EXFILTRATION
Analyze outbound communications traffic at external interfaces to the system and at the
following interior points to detect covert exfiltration of information: [Assignment:
organization-defined interior points within the system].
Discussion: Organization-defined interior points include subnetworks and subsystems.
Covert means that can be used to exfiltrate information include steganography.
SYSTEM MONITORING | RISK FOR INDIVIDUALS
Implement [Assignment: organization-defined additional monitoring] of individuals who
have been identified by [Assignment: organization-defined sources] as posing an increased
level of risk.
Discussion: Indications of increased risk from individuals can be obtained from different
sources, including personnel records, intelligence agencies, law enforcement organizations,
and other sources. The monitoring of individuals is coordinated with the management, legal,
security, privacy, and human resource officials who conduct such monitoring. Monitoring is
conducted in accordance with applicable laws, executive orders, directives, regulations,
policies, standards, and guidelines
SYSTEM MONITORING | PRIVILEGED USERS
Implement the following additional monitoring of privileged users: [Assignment:
organization-defined additional monitoring].
Discussion: Privileged users have access to more sensitive information, including securityrelated information, than the general user population. Access to such information means
that privileged users can potentially do greater damage to systems and organizations than
non-privileged users. Therefore, implementing additional monitoring on privileged users
helps to ensure that organizations can identify malicious activity at the earliest possible time
and take appropriate actions.
SYSTEM MONITORING | PROBATIONARY PERIODS
Implement the following additional monitoring of individuals during [Assignment:
organization-defined probationary period]: [Assignment: organization-defined additional
monitoring].
Discussion: During probationary periods, employees do not have permanent employment
status within organizations. Without such status or access to information that is resident on
the system, additional monitoring can help identify any potentially malicious activity or
inappropriate behavior.
) SYSTEM MONITORING | UNAUTHORIZED NETWORK SERVICES
(a) Detect network services that have not been authorized or approved by [Assignment:
organization-defined authorization or approval processes]; and
(b) [Selection (one or more): Audit; Alert [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or
roles]] when detected.
Discussion: Unauthorized or unapproved network services include services in serviceoriented architectures that lack organizational verification or validation and may therefore
be unreliable or serve as malicious rogues for valid services.
SYSTEM MONITORING | HOST-BASED DEVICES
Implement the following host-based monitoring mechanisms at [Assignment:
organization-defined system components]: [Assignment: organization-defined host-based
monitoring mechanisms].
Discussion: Host-based monitoring collects information about the host (or system in which it
resides). System components in which host-based monitoring can be implemented include
servers, notebook computers, and mobile devices. Organizations may consider employing
host-based monitoring mechanisms from multiple product developers or vendors.
) SYSTEM MONITORING | INDICATORS OF COMPROMISE
Discover, collect, and distribute to [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles],
indicators of compromise provided by [Assignment: organization-defined sources].
Discussion: Indicators of compromise (IOC) are forensic artifacts from intrusions that are
identified on organizational systems at the host or network level. IOCs provide valuable
information on systems that have been compromised. IOCs can include the creation of
registry key values. IOCs for network traffic include Universal Resource Locator or protocol
elements that indicate malicious code command and control servers. The rapid distribution
and adoption of IOCs can improve information security by reducing the time that systems
and organizations are vulnerable to the same exploit or attack. Threat indicators, signatures,
tactics, techniques, procedures, and other indicators of compromise may be available via
government and non-government cooperatives, including the Forum of Incident Response
and Security Teams, the United States Computer Emergency Readiness Team, the Defense
Industrial Base Cybersecurity Information Sharing Program, and the CERT Coordination
Center
SYSTEM MONITORING | OPTIMIZE NETWORK TRAFFIC ANALYSIS
Provide visibility into network traffic at external and key internal system interfaces to
optimize the effectiveness of monitoring devices.
Discussion: Encrypted traffic, asymmetric routing architectures, capacity and latency
limitations, and transitioning from older to newer technologies (e.g., IPv4 to IPv6 network
protocol transition) may result in blind spots for organizations when analyzing network
traffic. Collecting, decrypting, pre-processing, and distributing only relevant traffic to
monitoring devices can streamline the efficiency and use of devices and optimize traffic
analysis.