DE.CM-1: The network is monitored to detect potential cybersecurity events
ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT
Control:
a. Define and document the types of accounts allowed and specifically prohibited for use
within the system;
b. Assign account managers;
c. Require [Assignment: organization-defined prerequisites and criteria] for group and role
membership;
d. Specify:
1. Authorized users of the system;
2. Group and role membership; and
3. Access authorizations (i.e., privileges) and [Assignment: organization-defined attributes
(as required)] for each account;
e. Require approvals by [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles] for requests to
create accounts;
f. Create, enable, modify, disable, and remove accounts in accordance with [Assignment:
organization-defined policy, procedures, prerequisites, and criteria];
g. Monitor the use of accounts;
h. Notify account managers and [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles] within:
1. [Assignment: organization-defined time period] when accounts are no longer required;
2. [Assignment: organization-defined time period] when users are terminated or
transferred; and
3. [Assignment: organization-defined time period] when system usage or need-to-know
changes for an individual;
i. Authorize access to the system based on:
1. A valid access authorization;
2. Intended system usage; and
3. [Assignment: organization-defined attributes (as required)];
j. Review accounts for compliance with account management requirements [Assignment:
organization-defined frequency];
k. Establish and implement a process for changing shared or group account authenticators (if
deployed) when individuals are removed from the group; and
l. Align account management processes with personnel termination and transfer processes.
Discussion: Examples of system account types include individual, shared, group, system, guest,
anonymous, emergency, developer, temporary, and service. Identification of authorized system
users and the specification of access privileges reflect the requirements in other controls in the
security plan. Users requiring administrative privileges on system accounts receive additional
scrutiny by organizational personnel responsible for approving such accounts and privileged
access, including system owner, mission or business owner, senior agency information security
officer, or senior agency official for privacy. Types of accounts that organizations may wish to
prohibit due to increased risk include shared, group, emergency, anonymous, temporary, and
guest accounts.
Where access involves personally identifiable information, security programs collaborate with
the senior agency official for privacy to establish the specific conditions for group and role
membership; specify authorized users, group and role membership, and access authorizations for
each account; and create, adjust, or remove system accounts in accordance with organizational
policies. Policies can include such information as account expiration dates or other factors that
trigger the disabling of accounts. Organizations may choose to define access privileges or other
attributes by account, type of account, or a combination of the two. Examples of other attributes
required for authorizing access include restrictions on time of day, day of week, and point of
origin. In defining other system account attributes, organizations consider system-related
requirements and mission/business requirements. Failure to consider these factors could affect
system availability.
Temporary and emergency accounts are intended for short-term use. Organizations establish
temporary accounts as part of normal account activation procedures when there is a need for
short-term accounts without the demand for immediacy in account activation. Organizations
establish emergency accounts in response to crisis situations and with the need for rapid account
activation. Therefore, emergency account activation may bypass normal account authorization
processes. Emergency and temporary accounts are not to be confused with infrequently used
accounts, including local logon accounts used for special tasks or when network resources are
unavailable (may also be known as accounts of last resort). Such accounts remain available and
are not subject to automatic disabling or removal dates. Conditions for disabling or deactivating
accounts include when shared/group, emergency, or temporary accounts are no longer required
and when individuals are transferred or terminated. Changing shared/group authenticators when
members leave the group is intended to ensure that former group members do not retain access
to the shared or group account. Some types of system accounts may require specialized training.
ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT | AUTOMATED SYSTEM ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT
Support the management of system accounts using [Assignment: organization-defined
automated mechanisms].
Discussion: Automated system account management includes using automated mechanisms
to create, enable, modify, disable, and remove accounts; notify account managers when an
account is created, enabled, modified, disabled, or removed, or when users are terminated
or transferred; monitor system account usage; and report atypical system account usage.
Automated mechanisms can include internal system functions and email, telephonic, and
text messaging notifications.
ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT | AUTOMATED TEMPORARY AND EMERGENCY ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT
Automatically [Selection: remove; disable] temporary and emergency accounts after
[Assignment: organization-defined time period for each type of account].
Discussion: Management of temporary and emergency accounts includes the removal or
disabling of such accounts automatically after a predefined time period rather than at the
convenience of the system administrator. Automatic removal or disabling of accounts
provides a more consistent implementation.
ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT | DISABLE ACCOUNTS
Disable accounts within [Assignment: organization-defined time period] when the
accounts:
(a) Have expired;
(b) Are no longer associated with a user or individual;
(c) Are in violation of organizational policy; or
(d) Have been inactive for [Assignment: organization-defined time period].
Discussion: Disabling expired, inactive, or otherwise anomalous accounts supports the
concepts of least privilege and least functionality which reduce the attack surface of the
system.
ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT | AUTOMATED AUDIT ACTIONS
Automatically audit account creation, modification, enabling, disabling, and removal
actions.
Discussion: Account management audit records are defined in accordance with AU-2 and
reviewed, analyzed, and reported in accordance with AU-6.
ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT | INACTIVITY LOGOUT
Require that users log out when [Assignment: organization-defined time period of
expected inactivity or description of when to log out].
Discussion: Inactivity logout is behavior- or policy-based and requires users to take physical
action to log out when they are expecting inactivity longer than the defined period.
Automatic enforcement of inactivity logout is addressed by AC-11.
ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT | DYNAMIC PRIVILEGE MANAGEMENT
Implement [Assignment: organization-defined dynamic privilege management
capabilities].
Discussion: In contrast to access control approaches that employ static accounts and
predefined user privileges, dynamic access control approaches rely on runtime access
control decisions facilitated by dynamic privilege management, such as attribute-based
access control. While user identities remain relatively constant over time, user privileges
typically change more frequently based on ongoing mission or business requirements and
the operational needs of organizations. An example of dynamic privilege management is the
immediate revocation of privileges from users as opposed to requiring that users terminate
and restart their sessions to reflect changes in privileges. Dynamic privilege management can
also include mechanisms that change user privileges based on dynamic rules as opposed to
editing specific user profiles. Examples include automatic adjustments of user privileges if
they are operating out of their normal work times, if their job function or assignment
changes, or if systems are under duress or in emergency situations. Dynamic privilege
management includes the effects of privilege changes, for example, when there are changes
to encryption keys used for communications
ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT | PRIVILEGED USER ACCOUNTS
(a) Establish and administer privileged user accounts in accordance with [Selection: a rolebased access scheme; an attribute-based access scheme];
(b) Monitor privileged role or attribute assignments;
(c) Monitor changes to roles or attributes; and
(d) Revoke access when privileged role or attribute assignments are no longer
appropriate.
Discussion: Privileged roles are organization-defined roles assigned to individuals that allow
those individuals to perform certain security-relevant functions that ordinary users are not
authorized to perform. Privileged roles include key management, account management,
database administration, system and network administration, and web administration. A
role-based access scheme organizes permitted system access and privileges into roles. In
contrast, an attribute-based access scheme specifies allowed system access and privileges
based on attributes
ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT | DYNAMIC ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT
Create, activate, manage, and deactivate [Assignment: organization-defined system
accounts] dynamically.
Discussion: Approaches for dynamically creating, activating, managing, and deactivating
system accounts rely on automatically provisioning the accounts at runtime for entities that
were previously unknown. Organizations plan for the dynamic management, creation,
activation, and deactivation of system accounts by establishing trust relationships, business
rules, and mechanisms with appropriate authorities to validate related authorizations and
privileges.
ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT | RESTRICTIONS ON USE OF SHARED AND GROUP ACCOUNTS
Only permit the use of shared and group accounts that meet [Assignment: organizationdefined conditions for establishing shared and group accounts].
Discussion: Before permitting the use of shared or group accounts, organizations consider
the increased risk due to the lack of accountability with such accounts.
ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT | USAGE CONDITIONS
Enforce [Assignment: organization-defined circumstances and/or usage conditions] for
[Assignment: organization-defined system accounts].
Discussion: Specifying and enforcing usage conditions helps to enforce the principle of least
privilege, increase user accountability, and enable effective account monitoring. Account
monitoring includes alerts generated if the account is used in violation of organizational
parameters. Organizations can describe specific conditions or circumstances under which
system accounts can be used, such as by restricting usage to certain days of the week, time
of day, or specific durations of time
ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT | ACCOUNT MONITORING FOR ATYPICAL USAGE
(a) Monitor system accounts for [Assignment: organization-defined atypical usage]; and
(b) Report atypical usage of system accounts to [Assignment: organization-defined
personnel or roles].
Discussion: Atypical usage includes accessing systems at certain times of the day or from
locations that are not consistent with the normal usage patterns of individuals. Monitoring
for atypical usage may reveal rogue behavior by individuals or an attack in progress. Account
monitoring may inadvertently create privacy risks since data collected to identify atypical
usage may reveal previously unknown information about the behavior of individuals.
Organizations assess and document privacy risks from monitoring accounts for atypical
usage in their privacy impact assessment and make determinations that are in alignment
with their privacy program plan.
ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT | DISABLE ACCOUNTS FOR HIGH-RISK INDIVIDUALS
Disable accounts of individuals within [Assignment: organization-defined time period] of
discovery of [Assignment: organization-defined significant risks].
Discussion: Users who pose a significant security and/or privacy risk include individuals for
whom reliable evidence indicates either the intention to use authorized access to systems to
cause harm or through whom adversaries will cause harm. Such harm includes adverse
impacts to organizational operations, organizational assets, individuals, other organizations,
or the Nation. Close coordination among system administrators, legal staff, human resource
managers, and authorizing officials is essential when disabling system accounts for high-risk
individuals
AUDIT RECORD GENERATION
Control:
a. Provide audit record generation capability for the event types the system is capable of
auditing as defined in AU-2a on [Assignment: organization-defined system components];
b. Allow [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles] to select the event types that
are to be logged by specific components of the system; and
c. Generate audit records for the event types defined in AU-2c that include the audit record
content defined in AU-3.
Discussion: Audit records can be generated from many different system components. The event
types specified in AU-2d are the event types for which audit logs are to be generated and are a
subset of all event types for which the system can generate audit records.
AUDIT RECORD GENERATION | SYSTEM-WIDE AND TIME-CORRELATED AUDIT TRAIL
Compile audit records from [Assignment: organization-defined system components] into a
system-wide (logical or physical) audit trail that is time-correlated to within [Assignment:
organization-defined level of tolerance for the relationship between time stamps of
individual records in the audit trail].
Discussion: Audit trails are time-correlated if the time stamps in the individual audit records
can be reliably related to the time stamps in other audit records to achieve a time ordering
of the records within organizational tolerances.
AUDIT RECORD GENERATION | STANDARDIZED FORMATS
Produce a system-wide (logical or physical) audit trail composed of audit records in a
standardized format.
Discussion: Audit records that follow common standards promote interoperability and
information exchange between devices and systems. Promoting interoperability and
information exchange facilitates the production of event information that can be readily
analyzed and correlated. If logging mechanisms do not conform to standardized formats,
systems may convert individual audit records into standardized formats when compiling
system-wide audit trails
AUDIT RECORD GENERATION | CHANGES BY AUTHORIZED INDIVIDUALS
Provide and implement the capability for [Assignment: organization-defined individuals or
roles] to change the logging to be performed on [Assignment: organization-defined system
components] based on [Assignment: organization-defined selectable event criteria] within
[Assignment: organization-defined time thresholds].
Discussion: Permitting authorized individuals to make changes to system logging enables
organizations to extend or limit logging as necessary to meet organizational requirements.
Logging that is limited to conserve system resources may be extended (either temporarily or
permanently) to address certain threat situations. In addition, logging may be limited to a
specific set of event types to facilitate audit reduction, analysis, and reporting. Organizations
can establish time thresholds in which logging actions are changed (e.g., near real-time,
within minutes, or within hours).
AUDIT RECORD GENERATION | QUERY PARAMETER AUDITS OF PERSONALLY IDENTIFIABLE
INFORMATION
Provide and implement the capability for auditing the parameters of user query events for
data sets containing personally identifiable information.
Discussion: Query parameters are explicit criteria that an individual or automated system
submits to a system to retrieve data. Auditing of query parameters for datasets that contain
personally identifiable information augments the capability of an organization to track and
understand the access, usage, or sharing of personally identifiable information by authorized
personnel.
CONTINUOUS MONITORING
Control: Develop a system-level continuous monitoring strategy and implement continuous
monitoring in accordance with the organization-level continuous monitoring strategy that
includes:
a. Establishing the following system-level metrics to be monitored: [Assignment: organizationdefined system-level metrics];
b. Establishing [Assignment: organization-defined frequencies] for monitoring and
[Assignment: organization-defined frequencies] for assessment of control effectiveness;
c. Ongoing control assessments in accordance with the continuous monitoring strategy;
d. Ongoing monitoring of system and organization-defined metrics in accordance with the
continuous monitoring strategy;
e. Correlation and analysis of information generated by control assessments and monitoring;
f. Response actions to address results of the analysis of control assessment and monitoring
information; and
g. Reporting the security and privacy status of the system to [Assignment: organizationdefined personnel or roles] [Assignment: organization-defined frequency].
Discussion: Continuous monitoring at the system level facilitates ongoing awareness of the
system security and privacy posture to support organizational risk management decisions. The
terms “continuous” and “ongoing” imply that organizations assess and monitor their controls
and risks at a frequency sufficient to support risk-based decisions. Different types of controls may
require different monitoring frequencies. The results of continuous monitoring generate risk
response actions by organizations. When monitoring the effectiveness of multiple controls that
have been grouped into capabilities, a root-cause analysis may be needed to determine the
specific control that has failed. Continuous monitoring programs allow organizations to maintain
the authorizations of systems and common controls in highly dynamic environments of operation
with changing mission and business needs, threats, vulnerabilities, and technologies. Having
access to security and privacy information on a continuing basis through reports and dashboards
gives organizational officials the ability to make effective and timely risk management decisions,
including ongoing authorization decisions.
Automation supports more frequent updates to hardware, software, and firmware inventories,
authorization packages, and other system information. Effectiveness is further enhanced when
continuous monitoring outputs are formatted to provide information that is specific, measurable,
actionable, relevant, and timely. Continuous monitoring activities are scaled in accordance with
the security categories of systems. Monitoring requirements, including the need for specific
monitoring, may be referenced in other controls and control enhancements,
CONTINUOUS MONITORING | INDEPENDENT ASSESSMENT
Employ independent assessors or assessment teams to monitor the controls in the system
on an ongoing basis.
Discussion: Organizations maximize the value of control assessments by requiring that
assessments be conducted by assessors with appropriate levels of independence. The level
of required independence is based on organizational continuous monitoring strategies.
Assessor independence provides a degree of impartiality to the monitoring process. To
achieve such impartiality, assessors do not create a mutual or conflicting interest with the
organizations where the assessments are being conducted, assess their own work, act as
management or employees of the organizations they are serving, or place themselves in
advocacy positions for the organizations acquiring their services.
CONTINUOUS MONITORING | TREND ANALYSES
Employ trend analyses to determine if control implementations, the frequency of
continuous monitoring activities, and the types of activities used in the continuous
monitoring process need to be modified based on empirical data.
Discussion: Trend analyses include examining recent threat information that addresses the
types of threat events that have occurred in the organization or the Federal Government,
success rates of certain types of attacks, emerging vulnerabilities in technologies, evolving
social engineering techniques, the effectiveness of configuration settings, results from
multiple control assessments, and findings from Inspectors General or auditors
CONTINUOUS MONITORING | RISK MONITORING
Ensure risk monitoring is an integral part of the continuous monitoring strategy that
includes the following:
(a) Effectiveness monitoring;
(b) Compliance monitoring; and
(c) Change monitoring.
Discussion: Risk monitoring is informed by the established organizational risk tolerance.
Effectiveness monitoring determines the ongoing effectiveness of the implemented risk
response measures. Compliance monitoring verifies that required risk response measures
are implemented. It also verifies that security and privacy requirements are satisfied. Change
monitoring identifies changes to organizational systems and environments of operation that
may affect security and privacy risk.
CONTINUOUS MONITORING | CONSISTENCY ANALYSIS
Employ the following actions to validate that policies are established and implemented
controls are operating in a consistent manner: [Assignment: organization-defined actions].
Discussion: Security and privacy controls are often added incrementally to a system. As a
result, policies for selecting and implementing controls may be inconsistent, and the controls
could fail to work together in a consistent or coordinated manner. At a minimum, the lack of
consistency and coordination could mean that there are unacceptable security and privacy
gaps in the system. At worst, it could mean that some of the controls implemented in one
location or by one component are actually impeding the functionality of other controls (e.g.,
encrypting internal network traffic can impede monitoring). In other situations, failing to
consistently monitor all implemented network protocols (e.g., a dual stack of IPv4 and IPv6)
may create unintended vulnerabilities in the system that could be exploited by adversaries.
It is important to validate—through testing, monitoring, and analysis—that the implemented
controls are operating in a consistent, coordinated, non-interfering manner.
) CONTINUOUS MONITORING | AUTOMATION SUPPORT FOR MONITORING
Ensure the accuracy, currency, and availability of monitoring results for the system using
[Assignment: organization-defined automated mechanisms].
Discussion: Using automated tools for monitoring helps to maintain the accuracy, currency,
and availability of monitoring information which in turns helps to increase the level of
ongoing awareness of the system security and privacy posture in support of organizational
risk management decisions.
CONFIGURATION CHANGE CONTROL
Control:
a. Determine and document the types of changes to the system that are configurationcontrolled;
b. Review proposed configuration-controlled changes to the system and approve or disapprove
such changes with explicit consideration for security and privacy impact analyses;
c. Document configuration change decisions associated with the system;
d. Implement approved configuration-controlled changes to the system;
e. Retain records of configuration-controlled changes to the system for [Assignment:
organization-defined time period];
f. Monitor and review activities associated with configuration-controlled changes to the
system; and
g. Coordinate and provide oversight for configuration change control activities through
[Assignment: organization-defined configuration change control element] that convenes
[Selection (one or more): [Assignment: organization-defined frequency]; when [Assignment:
organization-defined configuration change conditions]].
Discussion: Configuration change control for organizational systems involves the systematic
proposal, justification, implementation, testing, review, and disposition of system changes,
including system upgrades and modifications. Configuration change control includes changes to
baseline configurations, configuration items of systems, operational procedures, configuration
settings for system components, remediate vulnerabilities, and unscheduled or unauthorized
changes. Processes for managing configuration changes to systems include Configuration Control
Boards or Change Advisory Boards that review and approve proposed changes. For changes that
impact privacy risk, the senior agency official for privacy updates privacy impact assessments and
system of records notices. For new systems or major upgrades, organizations consider including
representatives from the development organizations on the Configuration Control Boards or
Change Advisory Boards. Auditing of changes includes activities before and after changes are
made to systems and the auditing activities required to implement such changes
CONFIGURATION CHANGE CONTROL | AUTOMATED DOCUMENTATION, NOTIFICATION, AND
PROHIBITION OF CHANGES
Use [Assignment: organization-defined automated mechanisms] to:
(a) Document proposed changes to the system;
(b) Notify [Assignment: organization-defined approval authorities] of proposed changes
to the system and request change approval;
(c) Highlight proposed changes to the system that have not been approved or
disapproved within [Assignment: organization-defined time period];
(d) Prohibit changes to the system until designated approvals are received;
(e) Document all changes to the system; and
(f) Notify [Assignment: organization-defined personnel] when approved changes to the
system are completed.
CONFIGURATION CHANGE CONTROL | TESTING, VALIDATION, AND DOCUMENTATION OF CHANGES
Test, validate, and document changes to the system before finalizing the implementation
of the changes.
Discussion: Changes to systems include modifications to hardware, software, or firmware
components and configuration settings defined in CM-6. Organizations ensure that testing
does not interfere with system operations that support organizational mission and business
functions. Individuals or groups conducting tests understand security and privacy policies
and procedures, system security and privacy policies and procedures, and the health, safety,
and environmental risks associated with specific facilities or processes. Operational systems
may need to be taken offline, or replicated to the extent feasible, before testing can be
conducted. If systems must be taken offline for testing, the tests are scheduled to occur
during planned system outages whenever possible. If the testing cannot be conducted on
operational systems, organizations employ compensating controls.
CONFIGURATION CHANGE CONTROL | AUTOMATED CHANGE IMPLEMENTATION
Implement changes to the current system baseline and deploy the updated baseline across
the installed base using [Assignment: organization-defined automated mechanisms].
Discussion: Automated tools can improve the accuracy, consistency, and availability of
configuration baseline information. Automation can also provide data aggregation and data
correlation capabilities, alerting mechanisms, and dashboards to support risk-based
decision-making within the organization.
CONFIGURATION CHANGE CONTROL | SECURITY AND PRIVACY REPRESENTATIVES
Require [Assignment: organization-defined security and privacy representatives] to be
members of the [Assignment: organization-defined configuration change control element].
Discussion: Information security and privacy representatives include system security
officers, senior agency information security officers, senior agency officials for privacy, or
system privacy officers. Representation by personnel with information security and privacy
expertise is important because changes to system configurations can have unintended side
effects, some of which may be security- or privacy-relevant. Detecting such changes early in
the process can help avoid unintended, negative consequences that could ultimately affect
the security and privacy posture of systems. The configuration change control element
referred to in the second organization-defined parameter reflects the change control
elements defined by organizations in CM-3g.
CONFIGURATION CHANGE CONTROL | AUTOMATED SECURITY RESPONSE
Implement the following security responses automatically if baseline configurations are
changed in an unauthorized manner: [Assignment: organization-defined security
responses].
Discussion: Automated security responses include halting selected system functions, halting
system processing, and issuing alerts or notifications to organizational personnel when there
is an unauthorized modification of a configuration item.
CONFIGURATION CHANGE CONTROL | CRYPTOGRAPHY MANAGEMENT
Ensure that cryptographic mechanisms used to provide the following controls are under
configuration management: [Assignment: organization-defined controls].
Discussion: The controls referenced in the control enhancement refer to security and
privacy controls from the control catalog. Regardless of the cryptographic mechanisms
employed, processes and procedures are in place to manage those mechanisms. For
example, if system components use certificates for identification and authentication, a
process is implemented to address the expiration of those certificates.
CONFIGURATION CHANGE CONTROL | REVIEW SYSTEM CHANGES
Review changes to the system [Assignment: organization-defined frequency] or when
[Assignment: organization-defined circumstances] to determine whether unauthorized
changes have occurred.
Discussion: Indications that warrant a review of changes to the system and the specific
circumstances justifying such reviews may be obtained from activities carried out by
organizations during the configuration change process or continuous monitoring process
CONFIGURATION CHANGE CONTROL | PREVENT OR RESTRICT CONFIGURATION CHANGES
Prevent or restrict changes to the configuration of the system under the following
circumstances: [Assignment: organization-defined circumstances].
Discussion: System configuration changes can adversely affect critical system security and
privacy functionality. Change restrictions can be enforced through automated mechanisms
DENIAL-OF-SERVICE PROTECTION
Control:
a. [Selection: Protect against; Limit] the effects of the following types of denial-of-service
events: [Assignment: organization-defined types of denial-of-service events]; and
b. Employ the following controls to achieve the denial-of-service objective: [Assignment:
organization-defined controls by type of denial-of-service event].
Discussion: Denial-of-service events may occur due to a variety of internal and external causes,
such as an attack by an adversary or a lack of planning to support organizational needs with
respect to capacity and bandwidth. Such attacks can occur across a wide range of network
protocols (e.g., IPv4, IPv6). A variety of technologies are available to limit or eliminate the
origination and effects of denial-of-service events. For example, boundary protection devices can
filter certain types of packets to protect system components on internal networks from being
directly affected by or the source of denial-of-service attacks. Employing increased network
capacity and bandwidth combined with service redundancy also reduces the susceptibility to
denial-of-service events.
DENIAL-OF-SERVICE PROTECTION | RESTRICT ABILITY TO ATTACK OTHER SYSTEMS
Restrict the ability of individuals to launch the following denial-of-service attacks against
other systems: [Assignment: organization-defined denial-of-service attacks].
Discussion: Restricting the ability of individuals to launch denial-of-service attacks requires
the mechanisms commonly used for such attacks to be unavailable. Individuals of concern
include hostile insiders or external adversaries who have breached or compromised the
system and are using it to launch a denial-of-service attack. Organizations can restrict the
ability of individuals to connect and transmit arbitrary information on the transport medium
(i.e., wired networks, wireless networks, spoofed Internet protocol packets). Organizations
can also limit the ability of individuals to use excessive system resources. Protection against
individuals having the ability to launch denial-of-service attacks may be implemented on
specific systems or boundary devices that prohibit egress to potential target systems.
DENIAL-OF-SERVICE PROTECTION | CAPACITY, BANDWIDTH, AND REDUNDANCY
Manage capacity, bandwidth, or other redundancy to limit the effects of information
flooding denial-of-service attacks.
Discussion: Managing capacity ensures that sufficient capacity is available to counter
flooding attacks. Managing capacity includes establishing selected usage priorities, quotas,
partitioning, or load balancing.
DENIAL-OF-SERVICE PROTECTION | DETECTION AND MONITORING
(a) Employ the following monitoring tools to detect indicators of denial-of-service attacks
against, or launched from, the system: [Assignment: organization-defined monitoring
tools]; and
(b) Monitor the following system resources to determine if sufficient resources exist to
prevent effective denial-of-service attacks: [Assignment: organization-defined system
resources].
Discussion: Organizations consider the utilization and capacity of system resources when
managing risk associated with a denial of service due to malicious attacks. Denial-of-service
attacks can originate from external or internal sources. System resources that are sensitive
to denial of service include physical disk storage, memory, and CPU cycles. Techniques used
to prevent denial-of-service attacks related to storage utilization and capacity include
instituting disk quotas, configuring systems to automatically alert administrators when
specific storage capacity thresholds are reached, using file compression technologies to
maximize available storage space, and imposing separate partitions for system and user
data.
BOUNDARY PROTECTION
Control:
a. Monitor and control communications at the external managed interfaces to the system and
at key internal managed interfaces within the system;
b. Implement subnetworks for publicly accessible system components that are [Selection:
physically; logically] separated from internal organizational networks; and
c. Connect to external networks or systems only through managed interfaces consisting of
boundary protection devices arranged in accordance with an organizational security and
privacy architecture.
Discussion: Managed interfaces include gateways, routers, firewalls, guards, network-based
malicious code analysis, virtualization systems, or encrypted tunnels implemented within a
security architecture. Subnetworks that are physically or logically separated from internal
networks are referred to as demilitarized zones or DMZs. Restricting or prohibiting interfaces
within organizational systems includes restricting external web traffic to designated web servers
within managed interfaces, prohibiting external traffic that appears to be spoofing internal
addresses, and prohibiting internal traffic that appears to be spoofing external addresses. [SP
800-189] provides additional information on source address validation techniques to prevent
ingress and egress of traffic with spoofed addresses. Commercial telecommunications services
are provided by network components and consolidated management systems shared by
customers. These services may also include third party-provided access lines and other service
elements. Such services may represent sources of increased risk despite contract security
provisions. Boundary protection may be implemented as a common control for all or part of an
organizational network such that the boundary to be protected is greater than a system-specific
boundary (i.e., an authorization boundary)
BOUNDARY PROTECTION | ACCESS POINTS
Limit the number of external network connections to the system.
Discussion: Limiting the number of external network connections facilitates monitoring of
inbound and outbound communications traffic. The Trusted Internet Connection [DHS TIC]
initiative is an example of a federal guideline that requires limits on the number of external
network connections. Limiting the number of external network connections to the system is
important during transition periods from older to newer technologies (e.g., transitioning
from IPv4 to IPv6 network protocols). Such transitions may require implementing the older
and newer technologies simultaneously during the transition period and thus increase the
number of access points to the system.
BOUNDARY PROTECTION | EXTERNAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES
(a) Implement a managed interface for each external telecommunication service;
(b) Establish a traffic flow policy for each managed interface;
(c) Protect the confidentiality and integrity of the information being transmitted across
each interface;
(d) Document each exception to the traffic flow policy with a supporting mission or
business need and duration of that need;
(e) Review exceptions to the traffic flow policy [Assignment: organization-defined
frequency] and remove exceptions that are no longer supported by an explicit mission
or business need;
(f) Prevent unauthorized exchange of control plane traffic with external networks;
(g) Publish information to enable remote networks to detect unauthorized control plane
traffic from internal networks; and
(h) Filter unauthorized control plane traffic from external networks.
Discussion: External telecommunications services can provide data and/or voice
communications services. Examples of control plane traffic include Border Gateway Protocol
(BGP) routing, Domain Name System (DNS), and management protocols. See [SP 800-189]
for additional information on the use of the resource public key infrastructure (RPKI) to
protect BGP routes and detect unauthorized BGP announcements.
BOUNDARY PROTECTION | DENY BY DEFAULT — ALLOW BY EXCEPTION
Deny network communications traffic by default and allow network communications
traffic by exception [Selection (one or more): at managed interfaces; for [Assignment:
organization-defined systems]].
Discussion: Denying by default and allowing by exception applies to inbound and outbound
network communications traffic. A deny-all, permit-by-exception network communications
traffic policy ensures that only those system connections that are essential and approved are
allowed. Deny by default, allow by exception also applies to a system that is connected to an
external system.
BOUNDARY PROTECTION | SPLIT TUNNELING FOR REMOTE DEVICES
Prevent split tunneling for remote devices connecting to organizational systems unless the
split tunnel is securely provisioned using [Assignment: organization-defined safeguards].
Discussion: Split tunneling is the process of allowing a remote user or device to establish a
non-remote connection with a system and simultaneously communicate via some other
connection to a resource in an external network. This method of network access enables a
user to access remote devices and simultaneously, access uncontrolled networks. Split
tunneling might be desirable by remote users to communicate with local system resources,
such as printers or file servers. However, split tunneling can facilitate unauthorized external
connections, making the system vulnerable to attack and to exfiltration of organizational
information. Split tunneling can be prevented by disabling configuration settings that allow
such capability in remote devices and by preventing those configuration settings from being
configurable by users. Prevention can also be achieved by the detection of split tunneling (or
of configuration settings that allow split tunneling) in the remote device, and by prohibiting
the connection if the remote device is using split tunneling. A virtual private network (VPN)
can be used to securely provision a split tunnel. A securely provisioned VPN includes locking
connectivity to exclusive, managed, and named environments, or to a specific set of preapproved addresses, without user control.
BOUNDARY PROTECTION | ROUTE TRAFFIC TO AUTHENTICATED PROXY SERVERS
Route [Assignment: organization-defined internal communications traffic] to [Assignment:
organization-defined external networks] through authenticated proxy servers at managed
interfaces.
Discussion: External networks are networks outside of organizational control. A proxy server
is a server (i.e., system or application) that acts as an intermediary for clients requesting
system resources from non-organizational or other organizational servers. System resources
that may be requested include files, connections, web pages, or services. Client requests
established through a connection to a proxy server are assessed to manage complexity and
provide additional protection by limiting direct connectivity. Web content filtering devices
are one of the most common proxy servers that provide access to the Internet. Proxy servers
can support the logging of Transmission Control Protocol sessions and the blocking of
specific Uniform Resource Locators, Internet Protocol addresses, and domain names. Web
proxies can be configured with organization-defined lists of authorized and unauthorized
websites. Note that proxy servers may inhibit the use of virtual private networks (VPNs) and
create the potential for “man-in-the-middle” attacks (depending on the implementation).
) BOUNDARY PROTECTION | RESTRICT THREATENING OUTGOING COMMUNICATIONS TRAFFIC
(a) Detect and deny outgoing communications traffic posing a threat to external systems;
and
(b) Audit the identity of internal users associated with denied communications.
Discussion: Detecting outgoing communications traffic from internal actions that may pose
threats to external systems is known as extrusion detection. Extrusion detection is carried
out within the system at managed interfaces. Extrusion detection includes the analysis of
incoming and outgoing communications traffic while searching for indications of internal
threats to the security of external systems. Internal threats to external systems include
traffic indicative of denial-of-service attacks, traffic with spoofed source addresses, and
traffic that contains malicious code. Organizations have criteria to determine, update, and
manage identified threats related to extrusion detection.
BOUNDARY PROTECTION | PREVENT EXFILTRATION
(a) Prevent the exfiltration of information; and
(b) Conduct exfiltration tests [Assignment: organization-defined frequency].
Discussion: Prevention of exfiltration applies to both the intentional and unintentional
exfiltration of information. Techniques used to prevent the exfiltration of information from
systems may be implemented at internal endpoints, external boundaries, and across
managed interfaces and include adherence to protocol formats, monitoring for beaconing
activity from systems, disconnecting external network interfaces except when explicitly
needed, employing traffic profile analysis to detect deviations from the volume and types of
traffic expected, call backs to command and control centers, conducting penetration testing,
monitoring for steganography, disassembling and reassembling packet headers, and using
data loss and data leakage prevention tools. Devices that enforce strict adherence to
protocol formats include deep packet inspection firewalls and Extensible Markup Language
(XML) gateways. The devices verify adherence to protocol formats and specifications at the
application layer and identify vulnerabilities that cannot be detected by devices that operate
at the network or transport layers. The prevention of exfiltration is similar to data loss
prevention or data leakage prevention and is closely associated with cross-domain solutions
and system guards that enforce information flow requirements.
BOUNDARY PROTECTION | RESTRICT INCOMING COMMUNICATIONS TRAFFIC
Only allow incoming communications from [Assignment: organization-defined authorized
sources] to be routed to [Assignment: organization-defined authorized destinations].
Discussion: General source address validation techniques are applied to restrict the use of
illegal and unallocated source addresses as well as source addresses that should only be
used within the system. The restriction of incoming communications traffic provides
determinations that source and destination address pairs represent authorized or allowed
communications. Determinations can be based on several factors, including the presence of
such address pairs in the lists of authorized or allowed communications, the absence of such
address pairs in lists of unauthorized or disallowed pairs, or meeting more general rules for
authorized or allowed source and destination pairs. Strong authentication of network
addresses is not possible without the use of explicit security protocols, and thus, addresses
can often be spoofed. Further, identity-based incoming traffic restriction methods can be
employed, including router access control lists and firewall rules.
BOUNDARY PROTECTION | HOST-BASED PROTECTION
Implement [Assignment: organization-defined host-based boundary protection
mechanisms] at [Assignment: organization-defined system components].
Discussion: Host-based boundary protection mechanisms include host-based firewalls.
System components that employ host-based boundary protection mechanisms include
servers, workstations, notebook computers, and mobile devices.
BOUNDARY PROTECTION | ISOLATION OF SECURITY TOOLS, MECHANISMS, AND SUPPORT
COMPONENTS
Isolate [Assignment: organization-defined information security tools, mechanisms, and
support components] from other internal system components by implementing physically
separate subnetworks with managed interfaces to other components of the system.
Discussion: Physically separate subnetworks with managed interfaces are useful in isolating
computer network defenses from critical operational processing networks to prevent
adversaries from discovering the analysis and forensics techniques employed by
organizations.
BOUNDARY PROTECTION | PROTECT AGAINST UNAUTHORIZED PHYSICAL CONNECTIONS
Protect against unauthorized physical connections at [Assignment: organization-defined
managed interfaces].
Discussion: Systems that operate at different security categories or classification levels may
share common physical and environmental controls, since the systems may share space
within the same facilities. In practice, it is possible that these separate systems may share
common equipment rooms, wiring closets, and cable distribution paths. Protection against
unauthorized physical connections can be achieved by using clearly identified and physically
separated cable trays, connection frames, and patch panels for each side of managed
interfaces with physical access controls that enforce limited authorized access to these
items.
BOUNDARY PROTECTION | NETWORKED PRIVILEGED ACCESSES
Route networked, privileged accesses through a dedicated, managed interface for
purposes of access control and auditing.
Discussion: Privileged access provides greater accessibility to system functions, including
security functions. Adversaries attempt to gain privileged access to systems through remote
access to cause adverse mission or business impacts, such as by exfiltrating information or
bringing down a critical system capability. Routing networked, privileged access requests
through a dedicated, managed interface further restricts privileged access for increased
access control and auditing.
BOUNDARY PROTECTION | PREVENT DISCOVERY OF SYSTEM COMPONENTS
Prevent the discovery of specific system components that represent a managed interface.
Discussion: Preventing the discovery of system components representing a managed
interface helps protect network addresses of those components from discovery through
common tools and techniques used to identify devices on networks. Network addresses are
not available for discovery and require prior knowledge for access. Preventing the discovery
of components and devices can be accomplished by not publishing network addresses, using
network address translation, or not entering the addresses in domain name systems.
Another prevention technique is to periodically change network addresses.
BOUNDARY PROTECTION | AUTOMATED ENFORCEMENT OF PROTOCOL FORMATS
Enforce adherence to protocol formats.
Discussion: System components that enforce protocol formats include deep packet
inspection firewalls and XML gateways. The components verify adherence to protocol
formats and specifications at the application layer and identify vulnerabilities that cannot be
detected by devices operating at the network or transport layers.
BOUNDARY PROTECTION | FAIL SECURE
Prevent systems from entering unsecure states in the event of an operational failure of a
boundary protection device.
Discussion: Fail secure is a condition achieved by employing mechanisms to ensure that in
the event of operational failures of boundary protection devices at managed interfaces,
systems do not enter into unsecure states where intended security properties no longer
hold. Managed interfaces include routers, firewalls, and application gateways that reside on
protected subnetworks (commonly referred to as demilitarized zones). Failures of boundary
protection devices cannot lead to or cause information external to the devices to enter the
devices nor can failures permit unauthorized information releases.
BOUNDARY PROTECTION | BLOCK COMMUNICATION FROM NON-ORGANIZATIONALLY CONFIGURED
HOSTS
Block inbound and outbound communications traffic between [Assignment: organizationdefined communication clients] that are independently configured by end users and
external service providers.
Discussion: Communication clients independently configured by end users and external
service providers include instant messaging clients and video conferencing software and
applications. Traffic blocking does not apply to communication clients that are configured by
organizations to perform authorized functions
BOUNDARY PROTECTION | DYNAMIC ISOLATION AND SEGREGATION
Provide the capability to dynamically isolate [Assignment: organization-defined system
components] from other system components.
Discussion: The capability to dynamically isolate certain internal system components is
useful when it is necessary to partition or separate system components of questionable
origin from components that possess greater trustworthiness. Component isolation reduces
the attack surface of organizational systems. Isolating selected system components can also
limit the damage from successful attacks when such attacks occur.
BOUNDARY PROTECTION | ISOLATION OF SYSTEM COMPONENTS
Employ boundary protection mechanisms to isolate [Assignment: organization-defined
system components] supporting [Assignment: organization-defined missions and/or
business functions].
Discussion: Organizations can isolate system components that perform different mission or
business functions. Such isolation limits unauthorized information flows among system
components and provides the opportunity to deploy greater levels of protection for selected
system components. Isolating system components with boundary protection mechanisms
provides the capability for increased protection of individual system components and to
more effectively control information flows between those components. Isolating system
components provides enhanced protection that limits the potential harm from hostile cyberattacks and errors. The degree of isolation varies depending upon the mechanisms chosen.
Boundary protection mechanisms include routers, gateways, and firewalls that separate
system components into physically separate networks or subnetworks; cross-domain devices
that separate subnetworks; virtualization techniques; and the encryption of information
flows among system components using distinct encryption keys.
BOUNDARY PROTECTION | SEPARATE SUBNETS FOR CONNECTING TO DIFFERENT SECURITY DOMAINS
Implement separate network addresses to connect to systems in different security
domains.
Discussion: The decomposition of systems into subnetworks (i.e., subnets) helps to provide
the appropriate level of protection for network connections to different security domains
that contain information with different security categories or classification levels.
BOUNDARY PROTECTION | DISABLE SENDER FEEDBACK ON PROTOCOL VALIDATION FAILURE
Disable feedback to senders on protocol format validation failure.
Discussion: Disabling feedback to senders when there is a failure in protocol validation
format prevents adversaries from obtaining information that would otherwise be
unavailable.
BOUNDARY PROTECTION | PERSONALLY IDENTIFIABLE INFORMATION
For systems that process personally identifiable information:
(a) Apply the following processing rules to data elements of personally identifiable
information: [Assignment: organization-defined processing rules];
(b) Monitor for permitted processing at the external interfaces to the system and at key
internal boundaries within the system;
(c) Document each processing exception; and
(d) Review and remove exceptions that are no longer supported.
Discussion: Managing the processing of personally identifiable information is an important
aspect of protecting an individual’s privacy. Applying, monitoring for, and documenting
exceptions to processing rules ensure that personally identifiable information is processed
only in accordance with established privacy requirements.
BOUNDARY PROTECTION | UNCLASSIFIED NATIONAL SECURITY SYSTEM CONNECTIONS
Prohibit the direct connection of [Assignment: organization-defined unclassified national
security system] to an external network without the use of [Assignment: organizationdefined boundary protection device].
Discussion: A direct connection is a dedicated physical or virtual connection between two or
more systems. Organizations typically do not have complete control over external networks,
including the Internet. Boundary protection devices (e.g., firewalls, gateways, and routers)
mediate communications and information flows between unclassified national security
systems and external networks.
BOUNDARY PROTECTION | CLASSIFIED NATIONAL SECURITY SYSTEM CONNECTIONS
Prohibit the direct connection of a classified national security system to an external
network without the use of [Assignment: organization-defined boundary protection
device].
Discussion: A direct connection is a dedicated physical or virtual connection between two or
more systems. Organizations typically do not have complete control over external networks,
including the Internet. Boundary protection devices (e.g., firewalls, gateways, and routers)
mediate communications and information flows between classified national security systems
and external networks. In addition, approved boundary protection devices (typically
managed interface or cross-domain systems) provide information flow enforcement from
systems to external networks.
BOUNDARY PROTECTION | UNCLASSIFIED NON-NATIONAL SECURITY SYSTEM CONNECTIONS
Prohibit the direct connection of [Assignment: organization-defined unclassified nonnational security system] to an external network without the use of [Assignment:
organization-defined boundary protection device].
Discussion: A direct connection is a dedicated physical or virtual connection between two or
more systems. Organizations typically do not have complete control over external networks,
including the Internet. Boundary protection devices (e.g., firewalls, gateways, and routers)
mediate communications and information flows between unclassified non-national security
systems and external networks.
BOUNDARY PROTECTION | CONNECTIONS TO PUBLIC NETWORKS
Prohibit the direct connection of [Assignment: organization-defined system] to a public
network.
Discussion: A direct connection is a dedicated physical or virtual connection between two or
more systems. A public network is a network accessible to the public, including the Internet
and organizational extranets with public access.
BOUNDARY PROTECTION | SEPARATE SUBNETS TO ISOLATE FUNCTIONS
Implement [Selection: physically; logically] separate subnetworks to isolate the following
critical system components and functions: [Assignment: organization-defined critical
system components and functions].
Discussion: Separating critical system components and functions from other noncritical
system components and functions through separate subnetworks may be necessary to
reduce susceptibility to a catastrophic or debilitating breach or compromise that results in
system failure. For example, physically separating the command and control function from
the in-flight entertainment function through separate subnetworks in a commercial aircraft
provides an increased level of assurance in the trustworthiness of critical system functions.
SYSTEM MONITORING
Control:
a. Monitor the system to detect:
1. Attacks and indicators of potential attacks in accordance with the following monitoring
objectives: [Assignment: organization-defined monitoring objectives]; and
2. Unauthorized local, network, and remote connections;
b. Identify unauthorized use of the system through the following techniques and methods:
[Assignment: organization-defined techniques and methods];
c. Invoke internal monitoring capabilities or deploy monitoring devices:
1. Strategically within the system to collect organization-determined essential information;
and
2. At ad hoc locations within the system to track specific types of transactions of interest
to the organization;
d. Analyze detected events and anomalies;
e. Adjust the level of system monitoring activity when there is a change in risk to organizational
operations and assets, individuals, other organizations, or the Nation;
f. Obtain legal opinion regarding system monitoring activities; and
g. Provide [Assignment: organization-defined system monitoring information] to [Assignment:
organization-defined personnel or roles] [Selection (one or more): as needed; [Assignment:
organization-defined frequency]].
Discussion: System monitoring includes external and internal monitoring. External monitoring
includes the observation of events occurring at external interfaces to the system. Internal
monitoring includes the observation of events occurring within the system. Organizations
monitor systems by observing audit activities in real time or by observing other system aspects
such as access patterns, characteristics of access, and other actions. The monitoring objectives
guide and inform the determination of the events. System monitoring capabilities are achieved
through a variety of tools and techniques, including intrusion detection and prevention systems,
malicious code protection software, scanning tools, audit record monitoring software, and
network monitoring software.
Depending on the security architecture, the distribution and configuration of monitoring devices
may impact throughput at key internal and external boundaries as well as at other locations
across a network due to the introduction of network throughput latency. If throughput
management is needed, such devices are strategically located and deployed as part of an
established organization-wide security architecture. Strategic locations for monitoring devices
include selected perimeter locations and near key servers and server farms that support critical
applications. Monitoring devices are typically employed at the managed interfaces associated
with controls SC-7 and AC-17. The information collected is a function of the organizational
monitoring objectives and the capability of systems to support such objectives. Specific types of
transactions of interest include Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) traffic that bypasses HTTP
proxies. System monitoring is an integral part of organizational continuous monitoring and
incident response programs, and output from system monitoring serves as input to those
programs. System monitoring requirements, including the need for specific types of system
monitoring, may be referenced in other controls
Adjustments to levels of system monitoring are based on law enforcement information,
intelligence information, or other sources of information. The legality of system monitoring
activities is based on applicable laws, executive orders, directives, regulations, policies,
standards, and guidelines.
SYSTEM MONITORING | SYSTEM-WIDE INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM
Connect and configure individual intrusion detection tools into a system-wide intrusion
detection system.
Discussion: Linking individual intrusion detection tools into a system-wide intrusion
detection system provides additional coverage and effective detection capabilities. The
information contained in one intrusion detection tool can be shared widely across the
organization, making the system-wide detection capability more robust and powerful.
SYSTEM MONITORING | AUTOMATED TOOLS AND MECHANISMS FOR REAL-TIME ANALYSIS
Employ automated tools and mechanisms to support near real-time analysis of events.
Discussion: Automated tools and mechanisms include host-based, network-based,
transport-based, or storage-based event monitoring tools and mechanisms or security
information and event management (SIEM) technologies that provide real-time analysis of
alerts and notifications generated by organizational systems. Automated monitoring
techniques can create unintended privacy risks because automated controls may connect to
external or otherwise unrelated systems. The matching of records between these systems
may create linkages with unintended consequences. Organizations assess and document
these risks in their privacy impact assessment and make determinations that are in
alignment with their privacy program plan.
SYSTEM MONITORING | AUTOMATED TOOL AND MECHANISM INTEGRATION
Employ automated tools and mechanisms to integrate intrusion detection tools and
mechanisms into access control and flow control mechanisms.
Discussion: Using automated tools and mechanisms to integrate intrusion detection tools
and mechanisms into access and flow control mechanisms facilitates a rapid response to
attacks by enabling the reconfiguration of mechanisms in support of attack isolation and
elimination.
SYSTEM MONITORING | INBOUND AND OUTBOUND COMMUNICATIONS TRAFFIC
(a) Determine criteria for unusual or unauthorized activities or conditions for inbound
and outbound communications traffic;
(b) Monitor inbound and outbound communications traffic [Assignment: organizationdefined frequency] for [Assignment: organization-defined unusual or unauthorized
activities or conditions].
Discussion: Unusual or unauthorized activities or conditions related to system inbound and
outbound communications traffic includes internal traffic that indicates the presence of
malicious code or unauthorized use of legitimate code or credentials within organizational
systems or propagating among system components, signaling to external systems, and the
unauthorized exporting of information. Evidence of malicious code or unauthorized use of
legitimate code or credentials is used to identify potentially compromised systems or system
components.
SYSTEM MONITORING | SYSTEM-GENERATED ALERTS
Alert [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles] when the following systemgenerated indications of compromise or potential compromise occur: [Assignment:
organization-defined compromise indicators].
Discussion: Alerts may be generated from a variety of sources, including audit records or
inputs from malicious code protection mechanisms, intrusion detection or prevention
mechanisms, or boundary protection devices such as firewalls, gateways, and routers. Alerts
can be automated and may be transmitted telephonically, by electronic mail messages, or by
text messaging. Organizational personnel on the alert notification list can include system
administrators, mission or business owners, system owners, information owners/stewards,
senior agency information security officers, senior agency officials for privacy, system
security officers, or privacy officers. In contrast to alerts generated by the system, alerts
generated by organizations in SI-4(12) focus on information sources external to the system,
such as suspicious activity reports and reports on potential insider threats.
SYSTEM MONITORING | AUTOMATED RESPONSE TO SUSPICIOUS EVENTS
(a) Notify [Assignment: organization-defined incident response personnel (identified by
name and/or by role)] of detected suspicious events; and
(b) Take the following actions upon detection: [Assignment: organization-defined leastdisruptive actions to terminate suspicious events].
Discussion: Least-disruptive actions include initiating requests for human responses
SYSTEM MONITORING | TESTING OF MONITORING TOOLS AND MECHANISMS
Test intrusion-monitoring tools and mechanisms [Assignment: organization-defined
frequency].
Discussion: Testing intrusion-monitoring tools and mechanisms is necessary to ensure that
the tools and mechanisms are operating correctly and continue to satisfy the monitoring
objectives of organizations. The frequency and depth of testing depends on the types of
tools and mechanisms used by organizations and the methods of deployment.
SYSTEM MONITORING | VISIBILITY OF ENCRYPTED COMMUNICATIONS
Make provisions so that [Assignment: organization-defined encrypted communications
traffic] is visible to [Assignment: organization-defined system monitoring tools and
mechanisms].
Discussion: Organizations balance the need to encrypt communications traffic to protect
data confidentiality with the need to maintain visibility into such traffic from a monitoring
perspective. Organizations determine whether the visibility requirement applies to internal
encrypted traffic, encrypted traffic intended for external destinations, or a subset of the
traffic types.
SYSTEM MONITORING | ANALYZE COMMUNICATIONS TRAFFIC ANOMALIES
Analyze outbound communications traffic at the external interfaces to the system and
selected [Assignment: organization-defined interior points within the system] to discover
anomalies.
Discussion: Organization-defined interior points include subnetworks and subsystems.
Anomalies within organizational systems include large file transfers, long-time persistent
connections, attempts to access information from unexpected locations, the use of unusual
protocols and ports, the use of unmonitored network protocols (e.g., IPv6 usage during IPv4
transition), and attempted communications with suspected malicious external addresses.
SYSTEM MONITORING | AUTOMATED ORGANIZATION-GENERATED ALERTS
Alert [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles] using [Assignment:
organization-defined automated mechanisms] when the following indications of
inappropriate or unusual activities with security or privacy implications occur:
[Assignment: organization-defined activities that trigger alerts].
Discussion: Organizational personnel on the system alert notification list include system
administrators, mission or business owners, system owners, senior agency information
security officer, senior agency official for privacy, system security officers, or privacy officers.
Automated organization-generated alerts are the security alerts generated by organizations
and transmitted using automated means. The sources for organization-generated alerts are
focused on other entities such as suspicious activity reports and reports on potential insider
threats. In contrast to alerts generated by the organization, alerts generated by the system
in SI-4(5) focus on information sources that are internal to the systems, such as audit
records.
SYSTEM MONITORING | ANALYZE TRAFFIC AND EVENT PATTERNS
(a) Analyze communications traffic and event patterns for the system;
(b) Develop profiles representing common traffic and event patterns; and
(c) Use the traffic and event profiles in tuning system-monitoring devices.
Discussion: Identifying and understanding common communications traffic and event
patterns help organizations provide useful information to system monitoring devices to
more effectively identify suspicious or anomalous traffic and events when they occur. Such
information can help reduce the number of false positives and false negatives during system
monitoring.
SYSTEM MONITORING | WIRELESS INTRUSION DETECTION
Employ a wireless intrusion detection system to identify rogue wireless devices and to
detect attack attempts and potential compromises or breaches to the system.
Discussion: Wireless signals may radiate beyond organizational facilities. Organizations
proactively search for unauthorized wireless connections, including the conduct of thorough
scans for unauthorized wireless access points. Wireless scans are not limited to those areas
within facilities containing systems but also include areas outside of facilities to verify that
unauthorized wireless access points are not connected to organizational systems.
SYSTEM MONITORING | WIRELESS TO WIRELINE COMMUNICATIONS
Employ an intrusion detection system to monitor wireless communications traffic as the
traffic passes from wireless to wireline networks.
Discussion: Wireless networks are inherently less secure than wired networks. For example,
wireless networks are more susceptible to eavesdroppers or traffic analysis than wireline
networks. When wireless to wireline communications exist, the wireless network could
become a port of entry into the wired network. Given the greater facility of unauthorized
network access via wireless access points compared to unauthorized wired network access
from within the physical boundaries of the system, additional monitoring of transitioning
traffic between wireless and wired networks may be necessary to detect malicious activities.
Employing intrusion detection systems to monitor wireless communications traffic helps to
ensure that the traffic does not contain malicious code prior to transitioning to the wireline
network.
SYSTEM MONITORING | CORRELATE MONITORING INFORMATION
Correlate information from monitoring tools and mechanisms employed throughout the
system.
Discussion: Correlating information from different system monitoring tools and mechanisms
can provide a more comprehensive view of system activity. Correlating system monitoring
tools and mechanisms that typically work in isolation—including malicious code protection
software, host monitoring, and network monitoring—can provide an organization-wide
monitoring view and may reveal otherwise unseen attack patterns. Understanding the
capabilities and limitations of diverse monitoring tools and mechanisms and how to
maximize the use of information generated by those tools and mechanisms can help
organizations develop, operate, and maintain effective monitoring programs. The correlation
of monitoring information is especially important during the transition from older to newer
technologies (e.g., transitioning from IPv4 to IPv6 network protocols).
SYSTEM MONITORING | INTEGRATED SITUATIONAL AWARENESS
Correlate information from monitoring physical, cyber, and supply chain activities to
achieve integrated, organization-wide situational awareness.
Discussion: Correlating monitoring information from a more diverse set of information
sources helps to achieve integrated situational awareness. Integrated situational awareness
from a combination of physical, cyber, and supply chain monitoring activities enhances the
capability of organizations to more quickly detect sophisticated attacks and investigate the
methods and techniques employed to carry out such attacks. In contrast to SI-4(16), which
correlates the various cyber monitoring information, integrated situational awareness is
intended to correlate monitoring beyond the cyber domain. Correlation of monitoring
information from multiple activities may help reveal attacks on organizations that are
operating across multiple attack vectors.
) SYSTEM MONITORING | ANALYZE TRAFFIC AND COVERT EXFILTRATION
Analyze outbound communications traffic at external interfaces to the system and at the
following interior points to detect covert exfiltration of information: [Assignment:
organization-defined interior points within the system].
Discussion: Organization-defined interior points include subnetworks and subsystems.
Covert means that can be used to exfiltrate information include steganography.
SYSTEM MONITORING | RISK FOR INDIVIDUALS
Implement [Assignment: organization-defined additional monitoring] of individuals who
have been identified by [Assignment: organization-defined sources] as posing an increased
level of risk.
Discussion: Indications of increased risk from individuals can be obtained from different
sources, including personnel records, intelligence agencies, law enforcement organizations,
and other sources. The monitoring of individuals is coordinated with the management, legal,
security, privacy, and human resource officials who conduct such monitoring. Monitoring is
conducted in accordance with applicable laws, executive orders, directives, regulations,
policies, standards, and guidelines.
SYSTEM MONITORING | PRIVILEGED USERS
Implement the following additional monitoring of privileged users: [Assignment:
organization-defined additional monitoring].
Discussion: Privileged users have access to more sensitive information, including securityrelated information, than the general user population. Access to such information means
that privileged users can potentially do greater damage to systems and organizations than
non-privileged users. Therefore, implementing additional monitoring on privileged users
helps to ensure that organizations can identify malicious activity at the earliest possible time
and take appropriate actions.
SYSTEM MONITORING | PROBATIONARY PERIODS
Implement the following additional monitoring of individuals during [Assignment:
organization-defined probationary period]: [Assignment: organization-defined additional
monitoring].
Discussion: During probationary periods, employees do not have permanent employment
status within organizations. Without such status or access to information that is resident on
the system, additional monitoring can help identify any potentially malicious activity or
inappropriate behavior.
SYSTEM MONITORING | UNAUTHORIZED NETWORK SERVICES
(a) Detect network services that have not been authorized or approved by [Assignment:
organization-defined authorization or approval processes]; and
(b) [Selection (one or more): Audit; Alert [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or
roles]] when detected.
Discussion: Unauthorized or unapproved network services include services in serviceoriented architectures that lack organizational verification or validation and may therefore
be unreliable or serve as malicious rogues for valid services
SYSTEM MONITORING | HOST-BASED DEVICES
Implement the following host-based monitoring mechanisms at [Assignment:
organization-defined system components]: [Assignment: organization-defined host-based
monitoring mechanisms].
Discussion: Host-based monitoring collects information about the host (or system in which it
resides). System components in which host-based monitoring can be implemented include
servers, notebook computers, and mobile devices. Organizations may consider employing
host-based monitoring mechanisms from multiple product developers or vendors.
SYSTEM MONITORING | INDICATORS OF COMPROMISE
Discover, collect, and distribute to [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles],
indicators of compromise provided by [Assignment: organization-defined sources].
Discussion: Indicators of compromise (IOC) are forensic artifacts from intrusions that are
identified on organizational systems at the host or network level. IOCs provide valuable
information on systems that have been compromised. IOCs can include the creation of
registry key values. IOCs for network traffic include Universal Resource Locator or protocol
elements that indicate malicious code command and control servers. The rapid distribution
and adoption of IOCs can improve information security by reducing the time that systems
and organizations are vulnerable to the same exploit or attack. Threat indicators, signatures,
tactics, techniques, procedures, and other indicators of compromise may be available via
government and non-government cooperatives, including the Forum of Incident Response
and Security Teams, the United States Computer Emergency Readiness Team, the Defense
Industrial Base Cybersecurity Information Sharing Program, and the CERT Coordination
Center.
SYSTEM MONITORING | OPTIMIZE NETWORK TRAFFIC ANALYSIS
Provide visibility into network traffic at external and key internal system interfaces to
optimize the effectiveness of monitoring devices.
Discussion: Encrypted traffic, asymmetric routing architectures, capacity and latency
limitations, and transitioning from older to newer technologies (e.g., IPv4 to IPv6 network
protocol transition) may result in blind spots for organizations when analyzing network
traffic. Collecting, decrypting, pre-processing, and distributing only relevant traffic to
monitoring devices can streamline the efficiency and use of devices and optimize traffic
analysis.