DE.CM-2: The physical environment is monitored to detect potential cybersecurity events
CONTINUOUS MONITORING
Control: Develop a system-level continuous monitoring strategy and implement continuous
monitoring in accordance with the organization-level continuous monitoring strategy that
includes:
a. Establishing the following system-level metrics to be monitored: [Assignment: organizationdefined system-level metrics];
b. Establishing [Assignment: organization-defined frequencies] for monitoring and
[Assignment: organization-defined frequencies] for assessment of control effectiveness;
c. Ongoing control assessments in accordance with the continuous monitoring strategy;
d. Ongoing monitoring of system and organization-defined metrics in accordance with the
continuous monitoring strategy;
e. Correlation and analysis of information generated by control assessments and monitoring;
f. Response actions to address results of the analysis of control assessment and monitoring
information; and
g. Reporting the security and privacy status of the system to [Assignment: organizationdefined personnel or roles] [Assignment: organization-defined frequency].
Discussion: Continuous monitoring at the system level facilitates ongoing awareness of the
system security and privacy posture to support organizational risk management decisions. The
terms “continuous” and “ongoing” imply that organizations assess and monitor their controls
and risks at a frequency sufficient to support risk-based decisions. Different types of controls may
require different monitoring frequencies. The results of continuous monitoring generate risk
response actions by organizations. When monitoring the effectiveness of multiple controls that
have been grouped into capabilities, a root-cause analysis may be needed to determine the
specific control that has failed. Continuous monitoring programs allow organizations to maintain
the authorizations of systems and common controls in highly dynamic environments of operation
with changing mission and business needs, threats, vulnerabilities, and technologies. Having
access to security and privacy information on a continuing basis through reports and dashboards
gives organizational officials the ability to make effective and timely risk management decisions,
including ongoing authorization decisions.
Automation supports more frequent updates to hardware, software, and firmware inventories,
authorization packages, and other system information. Effectiveness is further enhanced when
continuous monitoring outputs are formatted to provide information that is specific, measurable,
actionable, relevant, and timely. Continuous monitoring activities are scaled in accordance with
the security categories of systems. Monitoring requirements, including the need for specific
monitoring, may be referenced in other controls and control enhancements,
CONTINUOUS MONITORING | INDEPENDENT ASSESSMENT
Employ independent assessors or assessment teams to monitor the controls in the system
on an ongoing basis.
Discussion: Organizations maximize the value of control assessments by requiring that
assessments be conducted by assessors with appropriate levels of independence. The level
of required independence is based on organizational continuous monitoring strategies.
Assessor independence provides a degree of impartiality to the monitoring process. To
achieve such impartiality, assessors do not create a mutual or conflicting interest with the
organizations where the assessments are being conducted, assess their own work, act as
management or employees of the organizations they are serving, or place themselves in
advocacy positions for the organizations acquiring their services.
CONTINUOUS MONITORING | TREND ANALYSES
Employ trend analyses to determine if control implementations, the frequency of
continuous monitoring activities, and the types of activities used in the continuous
monitoring process need to be modified based on empirical data.
Discussion: Trend analyses include examining recent threat information that addresses the
types of threat events that have occurred in the organization or the Federal Government,
success rates of certain types of attacks, emerging vulnerabilities in technologies, evolving
social engineering techniques, the effectiveness of configuration settings, results from
multiple control assessments, and findings from Inspectors General or auditors
CONTINUOUS MONITORING | RISK MONITORING
Ensure risk monitoring is an integral part of the continuous monitoring strategy that
includes the following:
(a) Effectiveness monitoring;
(b) Compliance monitoring; and
(c) Change monitoring.
Discussion: Risk monitoring is informed by the established organizational risk tolerance.
Effectiveness monitoring determines the ongoing effectiveness of the implemented risk
response measures. Compliance monitoring verifies that required risk response measures
are implemented. It also verifies that security and privacy requirements are satisfied. Change
monitoring identifies changes to organizational systems and environments of operation that
may affect security and privacy risk.
CONTINUOUS MONITORING | CONSISTENCY ANALYSIS
Employ the following actions to validate that policies are established and implemented
controls are operating in a consistent manner: [Assignment: organization-defined actions].
Discussion: Security and privacy controls are often added incrementally to a system. As a
result, policies for selecting and implementing controls may be inconsistent, and the controls
could fail to work together in a consistent or coordinated manner. At a minimum, the lack of
consistency and coordination could mean that there are unacceptable security and privacy
gaps in the system. At worst, it could mean that some of the controls implemented in one
location or by one component are actually impeding the functionality of other controls (e.g.,
encrypting internal network traffic can impede monitoring). In other situations, failing to
consistently monitor all implemented network protocols (e.g., a dual stack of IPv4 and IPv6)
may create unintended vulnerabilities in the system that could be exploited by adversaries.
It is important to validate—through testing, monitoring, and analysis—that the implemented
controls are operating in a consistent, coordinated, non-interfering manner.
) CONTINUOUS MONITORING | AUTOMATION SUPPORT FOR MONITORING
Ensure the accuracy, currency, and availability of monitoring results for the system using
[Assignment: organization-defined automated mechanisms].
Discussion: Using automated tools for monitoring helps to maintain the accuracy, currency,
and availability of monitoring information which in turns helps to increase the level of
ongoing awareness of the system security and privacy posture in support of organizational
risk management decisions.
PHYSICAL ACCESS CONTROL
Control:
a. Enforce physical access authorizations at [Assignment: organization-defined entry and exit
points to the facility where the system resides] by:
1. Verifying individual access authorizations before granting access to the facility; and
2. Controlling ingress and egress to the facility using [Selection (one or more): [Assignment:
organization-defined physical access control systems or devices]; guards];
b. Maintain physical access audit logs for [Assignment: organization-defined entry or exit
points];
c. Control access to areas within the facility designated as publicly accessible by implementing
the following controls: [Assignment: organization-defined physical access controls];
d. Escort visitors and control visitor activity [Assignment: organization-defined circumstances
requiring visitor escorts and control of visitor activity];
e. Secure keys, combinations, and other physical access devices;
f. Inventory [Assignment: organization-defined physical access devices] every [Assignment:
organization-defined frequency]; and
g. Change combinations and keys [Assignment: organization-defined frequency] and/or when
keys are lost, combinations are compromised, or when individuals possessing the keys or
combinations are transferred or terminated.
Discussion: Physical access control applies to employees and visitors. Individuals with permanent
physical access authorizations are not considered visitors. Physical access controls for publicly
accessible areas may include physical access control logs/records, guards, or physical access
devices and barriers to prevent movement from publicly accessible areas to non-public areas.
Organizations determine the types of guards needed, including professional security staff, system
users, or administrative staff. Physical access devices include keys, locks, combinations, biometric
readers, and card readers. Physical access control systems comply with applicable laws, executive
orders, directives, policies, regulations, standards, and guidelines. Organizations have flexibility in
the types of audit logs employed. Audit logs can be procedural, automated, or some combination
thereof. Physical access points can include facility access points, interior access points to systems
that require supplemental access controls, or both. Components of systems may be in areas
designated as publicly accessible with organizations controlling access to the components.
PHYSICAL ACCESS CONTROL | SYSTEM ACCESS
Enforce physical access authorizations to the system in addition to the physical access
controls for the facility at [Assignment: organization-defined physical spaces containing
one or more components of the system].
Discussion: Control of physical access to the system provides additional physical security for
those areas within facilities where there is a concentration of system components.
PHYSICAL ACCESS CONTROL | FACILITY AND SYSTEMS
Perform security checks [Assignment: organization-defined frequency] at the physical
perimeter of the facility or system for exfiltration of information or removal of system
components.
Discussion: Organizations determine the extent, frequency, and/or randomness of security
checks to adequately mitigate risk associated with exfiltration.
PHYSICAL ACCESS CONTROL | CONTINUOUS GUARDS
Employ guards to control [Assignment: organization-defined physical access points] to the
facility where the system resides 24 hours per day, 7 days per week.
Discussion: Employing guards at selected physical access points to the facility provides a
more rapid response capability for organizations. Guards also provide the opportunity for
human surveillance in areas of the facility not covered by video surveillance.
PHYSICAL ACCESS CONTROL | LOCKABLE CASINGS
Use lockable physical casings to protect [Assignment: organization-defined system
components] from unauthorized physical access.
Discussion: The greatest risk from the use of portable devices—such as smart phones,
tablets, and notebook computers—is theft. Organizations can employ lockable, physical
casings to reduce or eliminate the risk of equipment theft. Such casings come in a variety of
sizes, from units that protect a single notebook computer to full cabinets that can protect
multiple servers, computers, and peripherals. Lockable physical casings can be used in
conjunction with cable locks or lockdown plates to prevent the theft of the locked casing
containing the computer equipment.
PHYSICAL ACCESS CONTROL | TAMPER PROTECTION
Employ [Assignment: organization-defined anti-tamper technologies] to [Selection (one or
more): detect; prevent] physical tampering or alteration of [Assignment: organizationdefined hardware components] within the system.
Discussion: Organizations can implement tamper detection and prevention at selected
hardware components or implement tamper detection at some components and tamper
prevention at other components. Detection and prevention activities can employ many
types of anti-tamper technologies, including tamper-detection seals and anti-tamper
coatings. Anti-tamper programs help to detect hardware alterations through counterfeiting
and other supply chain-related risks.
Discussion: An access control vestibule is part of a physical access control system that
typically provides a space between two sets of interlocking doors. Vestibules are designed to
prevent unauthorized individuals from following authorized individuals into facilities with
controlled access. This activity, also known as piggybacking or tailgating, results in
unauthorized access to the facility. Interlocking door controllers can be used to limit the
number of individuals who enter controlled access points and to provide containment areas
while authorization for physical access is verified. Interlocking door controllers can be fully
automated (i.e., controlling the opening and closing of the doors) or partially automated
(i.e., using security guards to control the number of individuals entering the containment
area).
MONITORING PHYSICAL ACCESS
Control:
a. Monitor physical access to the facility where the system resides to detect and respond to
physical security incidents;
b. Review physical access logs [Assignment: organization-defined frequency] and upon
occurrence of [Assignment: organization-defined events or potential indications of events];
and
c. Coordinate results of reviews and investigations with the organizational incident response
capability.
Discussion: Physical access monitoring includes publicly accessible areas within organizational
facilities. Examples of physical access monitoring include the employment of guards, video
surveillance equipment (i.e., cameras), and sensor devices. Reviewing physical access logs can
help identify suspicious activity, anomalous events, or potential threats. The reviews can be
supported by audit logging controls, such as AU-2, if the access logs are part of an automated
system. Organizational incident response capabilities include investigations of physical security
incidents and responses to the incidents. Incidents include security violations or suspicious
physical access activities. Suspicious physical access activities include accesses outside of normal
work hours, repeated accesses to areas not normally accessed, accesses for unusual lengths of
time, and out-of-sequence accesses.
MONITORING PHYSICAL ACCESS | INTRUSION ALARMS AND SURVEILLANCE EQUIPMENT
Monitor physical access to the facility where the system resides using physical intrusion
alarms and surveillance equipment.
Discussion: Physical intrusion alarms can be employed to alert security personnel when
unauthorized access to the facility is attempted. Alarm systems work in conjunction with
physical barriers, physical access control systems, and security guards by triggering a
response when these other forms of security have been compromised or breached. Physical
intrusion alarms can include different types of sensor devices, such as motion sensors,
contact sensors, and broken glass sensors. Surveillance equipment includes video cameras
installed at strategic locations throughout the facility.
MONITORING PHYSICAL ACCESS | AUTOMATED INTRUSION RECOGNITION AND RESPONSES
Recognize [Assignment: organization-defined classes or types of intrusions] and initiate
[Assignment: organization-defined response actions] using [Assignment: organizationdefined automated mechanisms].
Discussion: Response actions can include notifying selected organizational personnel or law
enforcement personnel. Automated mechanisms implemented to initiate response actions
include system alert notifications, email and text messages, and activating door locking
mechanisms. Physical access monitoring can be coordinated with intrusion detection
systems and system monitoring capabilities to provide integrated threat coverage for the
organization
MONITORING PHYSICAL ACCESS | VIDEO SURVEILLANCE
(a) Employ video surveillance of [Assignment: organization-defined operational areas];
(b) Review video recordings [Assignment: organization-defined frequency]; and
(c) Retain video recordings for [Assignment: organization-defined time period].
Discussion: Video surveillance focuses on recording activity in specified areas for the
purposes of subsequent review, if circumstances so warrant. Video recordings are typically
reviewed to detect anomalous events or incidents. Monitoring the surveillance video is not
required, although organizations may choose to do so. There may be legal considerations
when performing and retaining video surveillance, especially if such surveillance is in a public
location.
MONITORING PHYSICAL ACCESS | MONITORING PHYSICAL ACCESS TO SYSTEMS
Monitor physical access to the system in addition to the physical access monitoring of the
facility at [Assignment: organization-defined physical spaces containing one or more
components of the system].
Discussion: Monitoring physical access to systems provides additional monitoring for those
areas within facilities where there is a concentration of system components, including server
rooms, media storage areas, and communications centers. Physical access monitoring can be
coordinated with intrusion detection systems and system monitoring capabilities to provide
comprehensive and integrated threat coverage for the organization.
ASSET MONITORING AND TRACKING
Control: Employ [Assignment: organization-defined asset location technologies] to track and
monitor the location and movement of [Assignment: organization-defined assets] within
[Assignment: organization-defined controlled areas].
Discussion: Asset location technologies can help ensure that critical assets—including vehicles,
equipment, and system components—remain in authorized locations. Organizations consult with
the Office of the General Counsel and senior agency official for privacy regarding the deployment
and use of asset location technologies to address potential privacy concerns.