DE.CM-3: Personnel activity is monitored to detect potential cybersecurity events
ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT
Control:
a. Define and document the types of accounts allowed and specifically prohibited for use
within the system;
b. Assign account managers;
c. Require [Assignment: organization-defined prerequisites and criteria] for group and role
membership;
d. Specify:
1. Authorized users of the system;
2. Group and role membership; and
3. Access authorizations (i.e., privileges) and [Assignment: organization-defined attributes
(as required)] for each account;
e. Require approvals by [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles] for requests to
create accounts;
f. Create, enable, modify, disable, and remove accounts in accordance with [Assignment:
organization-defined policy, procedures, prerequisites, and criteria];
g. Monitor the use of accounts;
h. Notify account managers and [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles] within:
1. [Assignment: organization-defined time period] when accounts are no longer required;
2. [Assignment: organization-defined time period] when users are terminated or
transferred; and
3. [Assignment: organization-defined time period] when system usage or need-to-know
changes for an individual;
i. Authorize access to the system based on:
1. A valid access authorization;
2. Intended system usage; and
3. [Assignment: organization-defined attributes (as required)];
j. Review accounts for compliance with account management requirements [Assignment:
organization-defined frequency];
k. Establish and implement a process for changing shared or group account authenticators (if
deployed) when individuals are removed from the group; and
l. Align account management processes with personnel termination and transfer processes.
Discussion: Examples of system account types include individual, shared, group, system, guest,
anonymous, emergency, developer, temporary, and service. Identification of authorized system
users and the specification of access privileges reflect the requirements in other controls in the
security plan. Users requiring administrative privileges on system accounts receive additional
scrutiny by organizational personnel responsible for approving such accounts and privileged
access, including system owner, mission or business owner, senior agency information security
officer, or senior agency official for privacy. Types of accounts that organizations may wish to
prohibit due to increased risk include shared, group, emergency, anonymous, temporary, and
guest accounts.
Where access involves personally identifiable information, security programs collaborate with
the senior agency official for privacy to establish the specific conditions for group and role
membership; specify authorized users, group and role membership, and access authorizations for
each account; and create, adjust, or remove system accounts in accordance with organizational
policies. Policies can include such information as account expiration dates or other factors that
trigger the disabling of accounts. Organizations may choose to define access privileges or other
attributes by account, type of account, or a combination of the two. Examples of other attributes
required for authorizing access include restrictions on time of day, day of week, and point of
origin. In defining other system account attributes, organizations consider system-related
requirements and mission/business requirements. Failure to consider these factors could affect
system availability.
Temporary and emergency accounts are intended for short-term use. Organizations establish
temporary accounts as part of normal account activation procedures when there is a need for
short-term accounts without the demand for immediacy in account activation. Organizations
establish emergency accounts in response to crisis situations and with the need for rapid account
activation. Therefore, emergency account activation may bypass normal account authorization
processes. Emergency and temporary accounts are not to be confused with infrequently used
accounts, including local logon accounts used for special tasks or when network resources are
unavailable (may also be known as accounts of last resort). Such accounts remain available and
are not subject to automatic disabling or removal dates. Conditions for disabling or deactivating
accounts include when shared/group, emergency, or temporary accounts are no longer required
and when individuals are transferred or terminated. Changing shared/group authenticators when
members leave the group is intended to ensure that former group members do not retain access
to the shared or group account. Some types of system accounts may require specialized training.
ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT | AUTOMATED SYSTEM ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT
Support the management of system accounts using [Assignment: organization-defined
automated mechanisms].
Discussion: Automated system account management includes using automated mechanisms
to create, enable, modify, disable, and remove accounts; notify account managers when an
account is created, enabled, modified, disabled, or removed, or when users are terminated
or transferred; monitor system account usage; and report atypical system account usage.
Automated mechanisms can include internal system functions and email, telephonic, and
text messaging notifications.
ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT | AUTOMATED TEMPORARY AND EMERGENCY ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT
Automatically [Selection: remove; disable] temporary and emergency accounts after
[Assignment: organization-defined time period for each type of account].
Discussion: Management of temporary and emergency accounts includes the removal or
disabling of such accounts automatically after a predefined time period rather than at the
convenience of the system administrator. Automatic removal or disabling of accounts
provides a more consistent implementation.
ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT | DISABLE ACCOUNTS
Disable accounts within [Assignment: organization-defined time period] when the
accounts:
(a) Have expired;
(b) Are no longer associated with a user or individual;
(c) Are in violation of organizational policy; or
(d) Have been inactive for [Assignment: organization-defined time period].
Discussion: Disabling expired, inactive, or otherwise anomalous accounts supports the
concepts of least privilege and least functionality which reduce the attack surface of the
system.
ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT | AUTOMATED AUDIT ACTIONS
Automatically audit account creation, modification, enabling, disabling, and removal
actions.
Discussion: Account management audit records are defined in accordance with AU-2 and
reviewed, analyzed, and reported in accordance with AU-6.
ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT | INACTIVITY LOGOUT
Require that users log out when [Assignment: organization-defined time period of
expected inactivity or description of when to log out].
Discussion: Inactivity logout is behavior- or policy-based and requires users to take physical
action to log out when they are expecting inactivity longer than the defined period.
Automatic enforcement of inactivity logout is addressed by AC-11.
ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT | DYNAMIC PRIVILEGE MANAGEMENT
Implement [Assignment: organization-defined dynamic privilege management
capabilities].
Discussion: In contrast to access control approaches that employ static accounts and
predefined user privileges, dynamic access control approaches rely on runtime access
control decisions facilitated by dynamic privilege management, such as attribute-based
access control. While user identities remain relatively constant over time, user privileges
typically change more frequently based on ongoing mission or business requirements and
the operational needs of organizations. An example of dynamic privilege management is the
immediate revocation of privileges from users as opposed to requiring that users terminate
and restart their sessions to reflect changes in privileges. Dynamic privilege management can
also include mechanisms that change user privileges based on dynamic rules as opposed to
editing specific user profiles. Examples include automatic adjustments of user privileges if
they are operating out of their normal work times, if their job function or assignment
changes, or if systems are under duress or in emergency situations. Dynamic privilege
management includes the effects of privilege changes, for example, when there are changes
to encryption keys used for communications
ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT | PRIVILEGED USER ACCOUNTS
(a) Establish and administer privileged user accounts in accordance with [Selection: a rolebased access scheme; an attribute-based access scheme];
(b) Monitor privileged role or attribute assignments;
(c) Monitor changes to roles or attributes; and
(d) Revoke access when privileged role or attribute assignments are no longer
appropriate.
Discussion: Privileged roles are organization-defined roles assigned to individuals that allow
those individuals to perform certain security-relevant functions that ordinary users are not
authorized to perform. Privileged roles include key management, account management,
database administration, system and network administration, and web administration. A
role-based access scheme organizes permitted system access and privileges into roles. In
contrast, an attribute-based access scheme specifies allowed system access and privileges
based on attributes
ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT | DYNAMIC ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT
Create, activate, manage, and deactivate [Assignment: organization-defined system
accounts] dynamically.
Discussion: Approaches for dynamically creating, activating, managing, and deactivating
system accounts rely on automatically provisioning the accounts at runtime for entities that
were previously unknown. Organizations plan for the dynamic management, creation,
activation, and deactivation of system accounts by establishing trust relationships, business
rules, and mechanisms with appropriate authorities to validate related authorizations and
privileges.
ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT | RESTRICTIONS ON USE OF SHARED AND GROUP ACCOUNTS
Only permit the use of shared and group accounts that meet [Assignment: organizationdefined conditions for establishing shared and group accounts].
Discussion: Before permitting the use of shared or group accounts, organizations consider
the increased risk due to the lack of accountability with such accounts.
ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT | USAGE CONDITIONS
Enforce [Assignment: organization-defined circumstances and/or usage conditions] for
[Assignment: organization-defined system accounts].
Discussion: Specifying and enforcing usage conditions helps to enforce the principle of least
privilege, increase user accountability, and enable effective account monitoring. Account
monitoring includes alerts generated if the account is used in violation of organizational
parameters. Organizations can describe specific conditions or circumstances under which
system accounts can be used, such as by restricting usage to certain days of the week, time
of day, or specific durations of time
ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT | ACCOUNT MONITORING FOR ATYPICAL USAGE
(a) Monitor system accounts for [Assignment: organization-defined atypical usage]; and
(b) Report atypical usage of system accounts to [Assignment: organization-defined
personnel or roles].
Discussion: Atypical usage includes accessing systems at certain times of the day or from
locations that are not consistent with the normal usage patterns of individuals. Monitoring
for atypical usage may reveal rogue behavior by individuals or an attack in progress. Account
monitoring may inadvertently create privacy risks since data collected to identify atypical
usage may reveal previously unknown information about the behavior of individuals.
Organizations assess and document privacy risks from monitoring accounts for atypical
usage in their privacy impact assessment and make determinations that are in alignment
with their privacy program plan.
ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT | DISABLE ACCOUNTS FOR HIGH-RISK INDIVIDUALS
Disable accounts of individuals within [Assignment: organization-defined time period] of
discovery of [Assignment: organization-defined significant risks].
Discussion: Users who pose a significant security and/or privacy risk include individuals for
whom reliable evidence indicates either the intention to use authorized access to systems to
cause harm or through whom adversaries will cause harm. Such harm includes adverse
impacts to organizational operations, organizational assets, individuals, other organizations,
or the Nation. Close coordination among system administrators, legal staff, human resource
managers, and authorizing officials is essential when disabling system accounts for high-risk
individuals
AUDIT RECORD GENERATION
Control:
a. Provide audit record generation capability for the event types the system is capable of
auditing as defined in AU-2a on [Assignment: organization-defined system components];
b. Allow [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles] to select the event types that
are to be logged by specific components of the system; and
c. Generate audit records for the event types defined in AU-2c that include the audit record
content defined in AU-3.
Discussion: Audit records can be generated from many different system components. The event
types specified in AU-2d are the event types for which audit logs are to be generated and are a
subset of all event types for which the system can generate audit records.
AUDIT RECORD GENERATION | SYSTEM-WIDE AND TIME-CORRELATED AUDIT TRAIL
Compile audit records from [Assignment: organization-defined system components] into a
system-wide (logical or physical) audit trail that is time-correlated to within [Assignment:
organization-defined level of tolerance for the relationship between time stamps of
individual records in the audit trail].
Discussion: Audit trails are time-correlated if the time stamps in the individual audit records
can be reliably related to the time stamps in other audit records to achieve a time ordering
of the records within organizational tolerances.
AUDIT RECORD GENERATION | STANDARDIZED FORMATS
Produce a system-wide (logical or physical) audit trail composed of audit records in a
standardized format.
Discussion: Audit records that follow common standards promote interoperability and
information exchange between devices and systems. Promoting interoperability and
information exchange facilitates the production of event information that can be readily
analyzed and correlated. If logging mechanisms do not conform to standardized formats,
systems may convert individual audit records into standardized formats when compiling
system-wide audit trails
AUDIT RECORD GENERATION | CHANGES BY AUTHORIZED INDIVIDUALS
Provide and implement the capability for [Assignment: organization-defined individuals or
roles] to change the logging to be performed on [Assignment: organization-defined system
components] based on [Assignment: organization-defined selectable event criteria] within
[Assignment: organization-defined time thresholds].
Discussion: Permitting authorized individuals to make changes to system logging enables
organizations to extend or limit logging as necessary to meet organizational requirements.
Logging that is limited to conserve system resources may be extended (either temporarily or
permanently) to address certain threat situations. In addition, logging may be limited to a
specific set of event types to facilitate audit reduction, analysis, and reporting. Organizations
can establish time thresholds in which logging actions are changed (e.g., near real-time,
within minutes, or within hours).
AUDIT RECORD GENERATION | QUERY PARAMETER AUDITS OF PERSONALLY IDENTIFIABLE
INFORMATION
Provide and implement the capability for auditing the parameters of user query events for
data sets containing personally identifiable information.
Discussion: Query parameters are explicit criteria that an individual or automated system
submits to a system to retrieve data. Auditing of query parameters for datasets that contain
personally identifiable information augments the capability of an organization to track and
understand the access, usage, or sharing of personally identifiable information by authorized
personnel.
MONITORING FOR INFORMATION DISCLOSURE
Control:
a. Monitor [Assignment: organization-defined open-source information and/or information
sites] [Assignment: organization-defined frequency] for evidence of unauthorized disclosure
of organizational information; and
b. If an information disclosure is discovered:
1. Notify [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles]; and
2. Take the following additional actions: [Assignment: organization-defined additional
actions].
Discussion: Unauthorized disclosure of information is a form of data leakage. Open-source
information includes social networking sites and code-sharing platforms and repositories.
Examples of organizational information include personally identifiable information retained by
the organization or proprietary information generated by the organization.
MONITORING FOR INFORMATION DISCLOSURE | USE OF AUTOMATED TOOLS
Monitor open-source information and information sites using [Assignment: organizationdefined automated mechanisms].
Discussion: Automated mechanisms include commercial services that provide notifications
and alerts to organizations and automated scripts to monitor new posts on websites.
MONITORING FOR INFORMATION DISCLOSURE | REVIEW OF MONITORED SITES
Review the list of open-source information sites being monitored [Assignment:
organization-defined frequency].
Discussion: Reviewing the current list of open-source information sites being monitored on
a regular basis helps to ensure that the selected sites remain relevant. The review also
provides the opportunity to add new open-source information sites with the potential to
provide evidence of unauthorized disclosure of organizational information. The list of sites
monitored can be guided and informed by threat intelligence of other credible sources of
information.
MONITORING FOR INFORMATION DISCLOSURE | UNAUTHORIZED REPLICATION OF INFORMATION
Employ discovery techniques, processes, and tools to determine if external entities are
replicating organizational information in an unauthorized manner.
Discussion: The unauthorized use or replication of organizational information by external
entities can cause adverse impacts on organizational operations and assets, including
damage to reputation. Such activity can include the replication of an organizational website
by an adversary or hostile threat actor who attempts to impersonate the web-hosting
organization. Discovery tools, techniques, and processes used to determine if
external entities are replicating organizational information in an unauthorized manner
include scanning external websites, monitoring social media, and training staff to recognize
the unauthorized use of organizational information.
CONTINUOUS MONITORING
Control: Develop a system-level continuous monitoring strategy and implement continuous
monitoring in accordance with the organization-level continuous monitoring strategy that
includes:
a. Establishing the following system-level metrics to be monitored: [Assignment: organizationdefined system-level metrics];
b. Establishing [Assignment: organization-defined frequencies] for monitoring and
[Assignment: organization-defined frequencies] for assessment of control effectiveness;
c. Ongoing control assessments in accordance with the continuous monitoring strategy;
d. Ongoing monitoring of system and organization-defined metrics in accordance with the
continuous monitoring strategy;
e. Correlation and analysis of information generated by control assessments and monitoring;
f. Response actions to address results of the analysis of control assessment and monitoring
information; and
g. Reporting the security and privacy status of the system to [Assignment: organizationdefined personnel or roles] [Assignment: organization-defined frequency].
Discussion: Continuous monitoring at the system level facilitates ongoing awareness of the
system security and privacy posture to support organizational risk management decisions. The
terms “continuous” and “ongoing” imply that organizations assess and monitor their controls
and risks at a frequency sufficient to support risk-based decisions. Different types of controls may
require different monitoring frequencies. The results of continuous monitoring generate risk
response actions by organizations. When monitoring the effectiveness of multiple controls that
have been grouped into capabilities, a root-cause analysis may be needed to determine the
specific control that has failed. Continuous monitoring programs allow organizations to maintain
the authorizations of systems and common controls in highly dynamic environments of operation
with changing mission and business needs, threats, vulnerabilities, and technologies. Having
access to security and privacy information on a continuing basis through reports and dashboards
gives organizational officials the ability to make effective and timely risk management decisions,
including ongoing authorization decisions.
Automation supports more frequent updates to hardware, software, and firmware inventories,
authorization packages, and other system information. Effectiveness is further enhanced when
continuous monitoring outputs are formatted to provide information that is specific, measurable,
actionable, relevant, and timely. Continuous monitoring activities are scaled in accordance with
the security categories of systems. Monitoring requirements, including the need for specific
monitoring, may be referenced in other controls and control enhancements,
CONTINUOUS MONITORING | INDEPENDENT ASSESSMENT
Employ independent assessors or assessment teams to monitor the controls in the system
on an ongoing basis.
Discussion: Organizations maximize the value of control assessments by requiring that
assessments be conducted by assessors with appropriate levels of independence. The level
of required independence is based on organizational continuous monitoring strategies.
Assessor independence provides a degree of impartiality to the monitoring process. To
achieve such impartiality, assessors do not create a mutual or conflicting interest with the
organizations where the assessments are being conducted, assess their own work, act as
management or employees of the organizations they are serving, or place themselves in
advocacy positions for the organizations acquiring their services.
CONTINUOUS MONITORING | TREND ANALYSES
Employ trend analyses to determine if control implementations, the frequency of
continuous monitoring activities, and the types of activities used in the continuous
monitoring process need to be modified based on empirical data.
Discussion: Trend analyses include examining recent threat information that addresses the
types of threat events that have occurred in the organization or the Federal Government,
success rates of certain types of attacks, emerging vulnerabilities in technologies, evolving
social engineering techniques, the effectiveness of configuration settings, results from
multiple control assessments, and findings from Inspectors General or auditors
CONTINUOUS MONITORING | RISK MONITORING
Ensure risk monitoring is an integral part of the continuous monitoring strategy that
includes the following:
(a) Effectiveness monitoring;
(b) Compliance monitoring; and
(c) Change monitoring.
Discussion: Risk monitoring is informed by the established organizational risk tolerance.
Effectiveness monitoring determines the ongoing effectiveness of the implemented risk
response measures. Compliance monitoring verifies that required risk response measures
are implemented. It also verifies that security and privacy requirements are satisfied. Change
monitoring identifies changes to organizational systems and environments of operation that
may affect security and privacy risk.
CONTINUOUS MONITORING | CONSISTENCY ANALYSIS
Employ the following actions to validate that policies are established and implemented
controls are operating in a consistent manner: [Assignment: organization-defined actions].
Discussion: Security and privacy controls are often added incrementally to a system. As a
result, policies for selecting and implementing controls may be inconsistent, and the controls
could fail to work together in a consistent or coordinated manner. At a minimum, the lack of
consistency and coordination could mean that there are unacceptable security and privacy
gaps in the system. At worst, it could mean that some of the controls implemented in one
location or by one component are actually impeding the functionality of other controls (e.g.,
encrypting internal network traffic can impede monitoring). In other situations, failing to
consistently monitor all implemented network protocols (e.g., a dual stack of IPv4 and IPv6)
may create unintended vulnerabilities in the system that could be exploited by adversaries.
It is important to validate—through testing, monitoring, and analysis—that the implemented
controls are operating in a consistent, coordinated, non-interfering manner.
) CONTINUOUS MONITORING | AUTOMATION SUPPORT FOR MONITORING
Ensure the accuracy, currency, and availability of monitoring results for the system using
[Assignment: organization-defined automated mechanisms].
Discussion: Using automated tools for monitoring helps to maintain the accuracy, currency,
and availability of monitoring information which in turns helps to increase the level of
ongoing awareness of the system security and privacy posture in support of organizational
risk management decisions.
SOFTWARE USAGE RESTRICTIONS
Control:
a. Use software and associated documentation in accordance with contract agreements and
copyright laws;
b. Track the use of software and associated documentation protected by quantity licenses to
control copying and distribution; and
c. Control and document the use of peer-to-peer file sharing technology to ensure that this
capability is not used for the unauthorized distribution, display, performance, or
reproduction of copyrighted work.
Discussion: Software license tracking can be accomplished by manual or automated methods,
depending on organizational needs. Examples of contract agreements include software license
agreements and non-disclosure agreements.
SOFTWARE USAGE RESTRICTIONS | OPEN-SOURCE SOFTWARE
Establish the following restrictions on the use of open-source software: [Assignment:
organization-defined restrictions].
Discussion: Open-source software refers to software that is available in source code form.
Certain software rights normally reserved for copyright holders are routinely provided under
software license agreements that permit individuals to study, change, and improve the
software. From a security perspective, the major advantage of open-source software is that
it provides organizations with the ability to examine the source code. In some cases, there is
an online community associated with the software that inspects, tests, updates, and reports
on issues found in software on an ongoing basis. However, remediating vulnerabilities in
open-source software may be problematic. There may also be licensing issues associated
with open-source software, including the constraints on derivative use of such software.
Open-source software that is available only in binary form may increase the level of risk in
using such software.
USER-INSTALLED SOFTWARE
Control:
a. Establish [Assignment: organization-defined policies] governing the installation of software
by users;
b. Enforce software installation policies through the following methods: [Assignment:
organization-defined methods]; and
c. Monitor policy compliance [Assignment: organization-defined frequency].
Discussion: If provided the necessary privileges, users can install software in organizational
systems. To maintain control over the software installed, organizations identify permitted and
prohibited actions regarding software installation. Permitted software installations include
updates and security patches to existing software and downloading new applications from
organization-approved “app stores.” Prohibited software installations include software with
unknown or suspect pedigrees or software that organizations consider potentially malicious.
Policies selected for governing user-installed software are organization-developed or provided by
some external entity. Policy enforcement methods can include procedural methods and
automated methods.
Enforce and monitor compliance with software installation policies using [Assignment:
organization-defined automated mechanisms].
Discussion: Organizations enforce and monitor compliance with software installation
policies using automated mechanisms to more quickly detect and respond to unauthorized
software installation which can be an indicator of an internal or external hostile attack.