DE.DP-1: Roles and responsibilities for detection are well defined to ensure accountability
CONTROL ASSESSMENTS
Control:
a. Select the appropriate assessor or assessment team for the type of assessment to be
conducted;
b. Develop a control assessment plan that describes the scope of the assessment including:
1. Controls and control enhancements under assessment;
2. Assessment procedures to be used to determine control effectiveness; and
3. Assessment environment, assessment team, and assessment roles and responsibilities;
c. Ensure the control assessment plan is reviewed and approved by the authorizing official or
designated representative prior to conducting the assessment;
d. Assess the controls in the system and its environment of operation [Assignment:
organization-defined frequency] to determine the extent to which the controls are
implemented correctly, operating as intended, and producing the desired outcome with
respect to meeting established security and privacy requirements;
e. Produce a control assessment report that document the results of the assessment; and
f. Provide the results of the control assessment to [Assignment: organization-defined
individuals or roles].
Discussion: Organizations ensure that control assessors possess the required skills and technical
expertise to develop effective assessment plans and to conduct assessments of system-specific,
hybrid, common, and program management controls, as appropriate. The required skills include
general knowledge of risk management concepts and approaches as well as comprehensive
knowledge of and experience with the hardware, software, and firmware system components
implemented.
Organizations assess controls in systems and the environments in which those systems operate
as part of initial and ongoing authorizations, continuous monitoring, FISMA annual assessments,
system design and development, systems security engineering, privacy engineering, and the
system development life cycle. Assessments help to ensure that organizations meet information
security and privacy requirements, identify weaknesses and deficiencies in the system design and
development process, provide essential information needed to make risk-based decisions as part
of authorization processes, and comply with vulnerability mitigation procedures. Organizations
conduct assessments on the implemented controls as documented in security and privacy plans.
Assessments can also be conducted throughout the system development life cycle as part of
systems engineering and systems security engineering processes. The design for controls can be
assessed as RFPs are developed, responses assessed, and design reviews conducted. If a design
to implement controls and subsequent implementation in accordance with the design are
assessed during development, the final control testing can be a simple confirmation utilizing
previously completed control assessment and aggregating the outcomes.
Organizations may develop a single, consolidated security and privacy assessment plan for the
system or maintain separate plans. A consolidated assessment plan clearly delineates the roles
and responsibilities for control assessment. If multiple organizations participate in assessing a
system, a coordinated approach can reduce redundancies and associated costs.
Organizations can use other types of assessment activities, such as vulnerability scanning and
system monitoring, to maintain the security and privacy posture of systems during the system
life cycle. Assessment reports document assessment results in sufficient detail, as deemed
necessary by organizations, to determine the accuracy and completeness of the reports and
whether the controls are implemented correctly, operating as intended, and producing the
desired outcome with respect to meeting requirements. Assessment results are provided to the
individuals or roles appropriate for the types of assessments being conducted. For example,
assessments conducted in support of authorization decisions are provided to authorizing
officials, senior agency officials for privacy, senior agency information security officers, and
authorizing official designated representatives.
To satisfy annual assessment requirements, organizations can use assessment results from the
following sources: initial or ongoing system authorizations, continuous monitoring, systems
engineering processes, or system development life cycle activities. Organizations ensure that
assessment results are current, relevant to the determination of control effectiveness, and
obtained with the appropriate level of assessor independence. Existing control assessment
results can be reused to the extent that the results are still valid and can also be supplemented
with additional assessments as needed. After the initial authorizations, organizations assess
controls during continuous monitoring. Organizations also establish the frequency for ongoing
assessments in accordance with organizational continuous monitoring strategies. External audits,
including audits by external entities such as regulatory agencies, are outside of the scope of CA-2.
CONTROL ASSESSMENTS | INDEPENDENT ASSESSORS
Employ independent assessors or assessment teams to conduct control assessments.
Discussion: Independent assessors or assessment teams are individuals or groups who
conduct impartial assessments of systems. Impartiality means that assessors are free from
any perceived or actual conflicts of interest regarding the development, operation,
sustainment, or management of the systems under assessment or the determination of
control effectiveness. To achieve impartiality, assessors do not create a mutual or conflicting
interest with the organizations where the assessments are being conducted, assess their
own work, act as management or employees of the organizations they are serving, or place
themselves in positions of advocacy for the organizations acquiring their services.
Independent assessments can be obtained from elements within organizations or be
contracted to public or private sector entities outside of organizations. Authorizing officials
determine the required level of independence based on the security categories of systems
and/or the risk to organizational operations, organizational assets, or individuals. Authorizing
officials also determine if the level of assessor independence provides sufficient assurance
that the results are sound and can be used to make credible, risk-based decisions. Assessor
independence determination includes whether contracted assessment services have
sufficient independence, such as when system owners are not directly involved in
contracting processes or cannot influence the impartiality of the assessors conducting the
assessments. During the system design and development phase, having independent
assessors is analogous to having independent SMEs involved in design reviews.
When organizations that own the systems are small or the structures of the organizations
require that assessments be conducted by individuals that are in the developmental,
operational, or management chain of the system owners, independence in assessment
processes can be achieved by ensuring that assessment results are carefully reviewed and
analyzed by independent teams of experts to validate the completeness, accuracy, integrity,
and reliability of the results. Assessments performed for purposes other than to support
authorization decisions are more likely to be useable for such decisions when performed by
assessors with sufficient independence, thereby reducing the need to repeat assessments.
CONTROL ASSESSMENTS | SPECIALIZED ASSESSMENTS
Include as part of control assessments, [Assignment: organization-defined frequency],
[Selection: announced; unannounced], [Selection (one or more): in-depth monitoring;
security instrumentation; automated security test cases; vulnerability scanning; malicious
user testing; insider threat assessment; performance and load testing; data leakage or
data loss assessment; [Assignment: organization-defined other forms of assessment]].
Discussion: Organizations can conduct specialized assessments, including verification and
validation, system monitoring, insider threat assessments, malicious user testing, and other
forms of testing. These assessments can improve readiness by exercising organizational
capabilities and indicating current levels of performance as a means of focusing actions to
improve security and privacy. Organizations conduct specialized assessments in accordance
with applicable laws, executive orders, directives, regulations, policies, standards, and
guidelines. Authorizing officials approve the assessment methods in coordination with the
organizational risk executive function. Organizations can include vulnerabilities uncovered
during assessments into vulnerability remediation processes. Specialized assessments can
also be conducted early in the system development life cycle (e.g., during initial design,
development, and unit testing)
CONTROL ASSESSMENTS | LEVERAGING RESULTS FROM EXTERNAL ORGANIZATIONS
Leverage the results of control assessments performed by [Assignment: organizationdefined external organization] on [Assignment: organization-defined system] when the
assessment meets [Assignment: organization-defined requirements].
Discussion: Organizations may rely on control assessments of organizational systems by
other (external) organizations. Using such assessments and reusing existing assessment
evidence can decrease the time and resources required for assessments by limiting the
independent assessment activities that organizations need to perform. The factors that
organizations consider in determining whether to accept assessment results from external
organizations can vary. Such factors include the organization’s past experience with the
organization that conducted the assessment, the reputation of the assessment organization,
the level of detail of supporting assessment evidence provided, and mandates imposed by
applicable laws, executive orders, directives, regulations, policies, standards, and guidelines.
Accredited testing laboratories that support the Common Criteria Program [ISO 15408-1],
the NIST Cryptographic Module Validation Program (CMVP), or the NIST Cryptographic
Algorithm Validation Program (CAVP) can provide independent assessment results that
organizations can leverage.
CONTINUOUS MONITORING
Control: Develop a system-level continuous monitoring strategy and implement continuous
monitoring in accordance with the organization-level continuous monitoring strategy that
includes:
a. Establishing the following system-level metrics to be monitored: [Assignment: organizationdefined system-level metrics];
b. Establishing [Assignment: organization-defined frequencies] for monitoring and
[Assignment: organization-defined frequencies] for assessment of control effectiveness;
c. Ongoing control assessments in accordance with the continuous monitoring strategy;
d. Ongoing monitoring of system and organization-defined metrics in accordance with the
continuous monitoring strategy;
e. Correlation and analysis of information generated by control assessments and monitoring;
f. Response actions to address results of the analysis of control assessment and monitoring
information; and
g. Reporting the security and privacy status of the system to [Assignment: organizationdefined personnel or roles] [Assignment: organization-defined frequency].
Discussion: Continuous monitoring at the system level facilitates ongoing awareness of the
system security and privacy posture to support organizational risk management decisions. The
terms “continuous” and “ongoing” imply that organizations assess and monitor their controls
and risks at a frequency sufficient to support risk-based decisions. Different types of controls may
require different monitoring frequencies. The results of continuous monitoring generate risk
response actions by organizations. When monitoring the effectiveness of multiple controls that
have been grouped into capabilities, a root-cause analysis may be needed to determine the
specific control that has failed. Continuous monitoring programs allow organizations to maintain
the authorizations of systems and common controls in highly dynamic environments of operation
with changing mission and business needs, threats, vulnerabilities, and technologies. Having
access to security and privacy information on a continuing basis through reports and dashboards
gives organizational officials the ability to make effective and timely risk management decisions,
including ongoing authorization decisions.
Automation supports more frequent updates to hardware, software, and firmware inventories,
authorization packages, and other system information. Effectiveness is further enhanced when
continuous monitoring outputs are formatted to provide information that is specific, measurable,
actionable, relevant, and timely. Continuous monitoring activities are scaled in accordance with
the security categories of systems. Monitoring requirements, including the need for specific
monitoring, may be referenced in other controls and control enhancements,
CONTINUOUS MONITORING | INDEPENDENT ASSESSMENT
Employ independent assessors or assessment teams to monitor the controls in the system
on an ongoing basis.
Discussion: Organizations maximize the value of control assessments by requiring that
assessments be conducted by assessors with appropriate levels of independence. The level
of required independence is based on organizational continuous monitoring strategies.
Assessor independence provides a degree of impartiality to the monitoring process. To
achieve such impartiality, assessors do not create a mutual or conflicting interest with the
organizations where the assessments are being conducted, assess their own work, act as
management or employees of the organizations they are serving, or place themselves in
advocacy positions for the organizations acquiring their services.
CONTINUOUS MONITORING | TREND ANALYSES
Employ trend analyses to determine if control implementations, the frequency of
continuous monitoring activities, and the types of activities used in the continuous
monitoring process need to be modified based on empirical data.
Discussion: Trend analyses include examining recent threat information that addresses the
types of threat events that have occurred in the organization or the Federal Government,
success rates of certain types of attacks, emerging vulnerabilities in technologies, evolving
social engineering techniques, the effectiveness of configuration settings, results from
multiple control assessments, and findings from Inspectors General or auditors
CONTINUOUS MONITORING | RISK MONITORING
Ensure risk monitoring is an integral part of the continuous monitoring strategy that
includes the following:
(a) Effectiveness monitoring;
(b) Compliance monitoring; and
(c) Change monitoring.
Discussion: Risk monitoring is informed by the established organizational risk tolerance.
Effectiveness monitoring determines the ongoing effectiveness of the implemented risk
response measures. Compliance monitoring verifies that required risk response measures
are implemented. It also verifies that security and privacy requirements are satisfied. Change
monitoring identifies changes to organizational systems and environments of operation that
may affect security and privacy risk.
CONTINUOUS MONITORING | CONSISTENCY ANALYSIS
Employ the following actions to validate that policies are established and implemented
controls are operating in a consistent manner: [Assignment: organization-defined actions].
Discussion: Security and privacy controls are often added incrementally to a system. As a
result, policies for selecting and implementing controls may be inconsistent, and the controls
could fail to work together in a consistent or coordinated manner. At a minimum, the lack of
consistency and coordination could mean that there are unacceptable security and privacy
gaps in the system. At worst, it could mean that some of the controls implemented in one
location or by one component are actually impeding the functionality of other controls (e.g.,
encrypting internal network traffic can impede monitoring). In other situations, failing to
consistently monitor all implemented network protocols (e.g., a dual stack of IPv4 and IPv6)
may create unintended vulnerabilities in the system that could be exploited by adversaries.
It is important to validate—through testing, monitoring, and analysis—that the implemented
controls are operating in a consistent, coordinated, non-interfering manner.
) CONTINUOUS MONITORING | AUTOMATION SUPPORT FOR MONITORING
Ensure the accuracy, currency, and availability of monitoring results for the system using
[Assignment: organization-defined automated mechanisms].
Discussion: Using automated tools for monitoring helps to maintain the accuracy, currency,
and availability of monitoring information which in turns helps to increase the level of
ongoing awareness of the system security and privacy posture in support of organizational
risk management decisions.
TESTING, TRAINING, AND MONITORING
Control:
a. Implement a process for ensuring that organizational plans for conducting security and
privacy testing, training, and monitoring activities associated with organizational systems:
1. Are developed and maintained; and
2. Continue to be executed; and
b. Review testing, training, and monitoring plans for consistency with the organizational risk
management strategy and organization-wide priorities for risk response actions.
Discussion: A process for organization-wide security and privacy testing, training, and monitoring
helps ensure that organizations provide oversight for testing, training, and monitoring activities
and that those activities are coordinated. With the growing importance of continuous monitoring
programs, the implementation of information security and privacy across the three levels of the
risk management hierarchy and the widespread use of common controls, organizations
coordinate and consolidate the testing and monitoring activities that are routinely conducted as
part of ongoing assessments supporting a variety of controls. Security and privacy training
activities, while focused on individual systems and specific roles, require coordination across all
organizational elements. Testing, training, and monitoring plans and activities are informed by
current threat and vulnerability assessments.