DE.DP-4: Event detection information is communicated
AUDIT RECORD REVIEW, ANALYSIS, AND REPORTING
Control:
a. Review and analyze system audit records [Assignment: organization-defined frequency] for
indications of [Assignment: organization-defined inappropriate or unusual activity] and the
potential impact of the inappropriate or unusual activity;
b. Report findings to [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles]; and
c. Adjust the level of audit record review, analysis, and reporting within the system when there
is a change in risk based on law enforcement information, intelligence information, or other
credible sources of information.
Discussion: Audit record review, analysis, and reporting covers information security- and privacyrelated logging performed by organizations, including logging that results from the monitoring of
account usage, remote access, wireless connectivity, mobile device connection, configuration
settings, system component inventory, use of maintenance tools and non-local maintenance,
physical access, temperature and humidity, equipment delivery and removal, communications at
system interfaces, and use of mobile code or Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP). Findings can be
reported to organizational entities that include the incident response team, help desk, and
security or privacy offices. If organizations are prohibited from reviewing and analyzing audit
records or unable to conduct such activities, the review or analysis may be carried out by other
organizations granted such authority. The frequency, scope, and/or depth of the audit record
review, analysis, and reporting may be adjusted to meet organizational needs based on new
information received.
AUDIT RECORD REVIEW, ANALYSIS, AND REPORTING | AUTOMATED PROCESS INTEGRATION
Integrate audit record review, analysis, and reporting processes using [Assignment:
organization-defined automated mechanisms].
Discussion: Organizational processes that benefit from integrated audit record review,
analysis, and reporting include incident response, continuous monitoring, contingency
planning, investigation and response to suspicious activities, and Inspector General audits.
AUDIT RECORD REVIEW, ANALYSIS, AND REPORTING | CORRELATE AUDIT RECORD REPOSITORIES
Analyze and correlate audit records across different repositories to gain organization-wide
situational awareness.
Discussion: Organization-wide situational awareness includes awareness across all three
levels of risk management (i.e., organizational level, mission/business process level, and
information system level) and supports cross-organization awareness.
AUDIT RECORD REVIEW, ANALYSIS, AND REPORTING | CENTRAL REVIEW AND ANALYSIS
Provide and implement the capability to centrally review and analyze audit records from
multiple components within the system.
Discussion: Automated mechanisms for centralized reviews and analyses include Security
Information and Event Management products
AUDIT RECORD REVIEW, ANALYSIS, AND REPORTING | INTEGRATED ANALYSIS OF AUDIT RECORDS
Integrate analysis of audit records with analysis of [Selection (one or more): vulnerability
scanning information; performance data; system monitoring information; [Assignment:
organization-defined data/information collected from other sources]] to further enhance
the ability to identify inappropriate or unusual activity.
Discussion: Integrated analysis of audit records does not require vulnerability scanning, the
generation of performance data, or system monitoring. Rather, integrated analysis requires
that the analysis of information generated by scanning, monitoring, or other data collection
activities is integrated with the analysis of audit record information. Security Information
and Event Management tools can facilitate audit record aggregation or consolidation from
multiple system components as well as audit record correlation and analysis. The use of
standardized audit record analysis scripts developed by organizations (with localized script
adjustments, as necessary) provides more cost-effective approaches for analyzing audit
record information collected. The correlation of audit record information with vulnerability
scanning information is important in determining the veracity of vulnerability scans of the
system and in correlating attack detection events with scanning results. Correlation with
performance data can uncover denial-of-service attacks or other types of attacks that result
in the unauthorized use of resources. Correlation with system monitoring information can
assist in uncovering attacks and in better relating audit information to operational situations.
AUDIT RECORD REVIEW, ANALYSIS, AND REPORTING | CORRELATION WITH PHYSICAL MONITORING
Correlate information from audit records with information obtained from monitoring
physical access to further enhance the ability to identify suspicious, inappropriate,
unusual, or malevolent activity.
Discussion: The correlation of physical audit record information and the audit records from
systems may assist organizations in identifying suspicious behavior or supporting evidence of
such behavior. For example, the correlation of an individual’s identity for logical access to
certain systems with the additional physical security information that the individual was
present at the facility when the logical access occurred may be useful in investigations
AUDIT RECORD REVIEW, ANALYSIS, AND REPORTING | PERMITTED ACTIONS
Specify the permitted actions for each [Selection (one or more): system process; role; user]
associated with the review, analysis, and reporting of audit record information.
Discussion: Organizations specify permitted actions for system processes, roles, and users
associated with the review, analysis, and reporting of audit records through system account
management activities. Specifying permitted actions on audit record information is a way to
enforce the principle of least privilege. Permitted actions are enforced by the system and
include read, write, execute, append, and delete
AUDIT RECORD REVIEW, ANALYSIS, AND REPORTING | FULL TEXT ANALYSIS OF PRIVILEGED
COMMANDS
Perform a full text analysis of logged privileged commands in a physically distinct
component or subsystem of the system, or other system that is dedicated to that analysis.
Discussion: Full text analysis of privileged commands requires a distinct environment for the
analysis of audit record information related to privileged users without compromising such
information on the system where the users have elevated privileges, including the capability
to execute privileged commands. Full text analysis refers to analysis that considers the full
text of privileged commands (i.e., commands and parameters) as opposed to analysis that
considers only the name of the command. Full text analysis includes the use of pattern
matching and heuristics
AUDIT RECORD REVIEW, ANALYSIS, AND REPORTING | CORRELATION WITH INFORMATION FROM
NONTECHNICAL SOURCES
Correlate information from nontechnical sources with audit record information to enhance
organization-wide situational awareness.
Discussion: Nontechnical sources include records that document organizational policy
violations related to harassment incidents and the improper use of information assets. Such
information can lead to a directed analytical effort to detect potential malicious insider
activity. Organizations limit access to information that is available from nontechnical sources
due to its sensitive nature. Limited access minimizes the potential for inadvertent release of
privacy-related information to individuals who do not have a need to know. The correlation
of information from nontechnical sources with audit record information generally occurs
only when individuals are suspected of being involved in an incident. Organizations obtain
legal advice prior to initiating such actions.
CONTROL ASSESSMENTS
Control:
a. Select the appropriate assessor or assessment team for the type of assessment to be
conducted;
b. Develop a control assessment plan that describes the scope of the assessment including:
1. Controls and control enhancements under assessment;
2. Assessment procedures to be used to determine control effectiveness; and
3. Assessment environment, assessment team, and assessment roles and responsibilities;
c. Ensure the control assessment plan is reviewed and approved by the authorizing official or
designated representative prior to conducting the assessment;
d. Assess the controls in the system and its environment of operation [Assignment:
organization-defined frequency] to determine the extent to which the controls are
implemented correctly, operating as intended, and producing the desired outcome with
respect to meeting established security and privacy requirements;
e. Produce a control assessment report that document the results of the assessment; and
f. Provide the results of the control assessment to [Assignment: organization-defined
individuals or roles].
Discussion: Organizations ensure that control assessors possess the required skills and technical
expertise to develop effective assessment plans and to conduct assessments of system-specific,
hybrid, common, and program management controls, as appropriate. The required skills include
general knowledge of risk management concepts and approaches as well as comprehensive
knowledge of and experience with the hardware, software, and firmware system components
implemented.
Organizations assess controls in systems and the environments in which those systems operate
as part of initial and ongoing authorizations, continuous monitoring, FISMA annual assessments,
system design and development, systems security engineering, privacy engineering, and the
system development life cycle. Assessments help to ensure that organizations meet information
security and privacy requirements, identify weaknesses and deficiencies in the system design and
development process, provide essential information needed to make risk-based decisions as part
of authorization processes, and comply with vulnerability mitigation procedures. Organizations
conduct assessments on the implemented controls as documented in security and privacy plans.
Assessments can also be conducted throughout the system development life cycle as part of
systems engineering and systems security engineering processes. The design for controls can be
assessed as RFPs are developed, responses assessed, and design reviews conducted. If a design
to implement controls and subsequent implementation in accordance with the design are
assessed during development, the final control testing can be a simple confirmation utilizing
previously completed control assessment and aggregating the outcomes.
Organizations may develop a single, consolidated security and privacy assessment plan for the
system or maintain separate plans. A consolidated assessment plan clearly delineates the roles
and responsibilities for control assessment. If multiple organizations participate in assessing a
system, a coordinated approach can reduce redundancies and associated costs.
Organizations can use other types of assessment activities, such as vulnerability scanning and
system monitoring, to maintain the security and privacy posture of systems during the system
life cycle. Assessment reports document assessment results in sufficient detail, as deemed
necessary by organizations, to determine the accuracy and completeness of the reports and
whether the controls are implemented correctly, operating as intended, and producing the
desired outcome with respect to meeting requirements. Assessment results are provided to the
individuals or roles appropriate for the types of assessments being conducted. For example,
assessments conducted in support of authorization decisions are provided to authorizing
officials, senior agency officials for privacy, senior agency information security officers, and
authorizing official designated representatives.
To satisfy annual assessment requirements, organizations can use assessment results from the
following sources: initial or ongoing system authorizations, continuous monitoring, systems
engineering processes, or system development life cycle activities. Organizations ensure that
assessment results are current, relevant to the determination of control effectiveness, and
obtained with the appropriate level of assessor independence. Existing control assessment
results can be reused to the extent that the results are still valid and can also be supplemented
with additional assessments as needed. After the initial authorizations, organizations assess
controls during continuous monitoring. Organizations also establish the frequency for ongoing
assessments in accordance with organizational continuous monitoring strategies. External audits,
including audits by external entities such as regulatory agencies, are outside of the scope of CA-2.
CONTROL ASSESSMENTS | INDEPENDENT ASSESSORS
Employ independent assessors or assessment teams to conduct control assessments.
Discussion: Independent assessors or assessment teams are individuals or groups who
conduct impartial assessments of systems. Impartiality means that assessors are free from
any perceived or actual conflicts of interest regarding the development, operation,
sustainment, or management of the systems under assessment or the determination of
control effectiveness. To achieve impartiality, assessors do not create a mutual or conflicting
interest with the organizations where the assessments are being conducted, assess their
own work, act as management or employees of the organizations they are serving, or place
themselves in positions of advocacy for the organizations acquiring their services.
Independent assessments can be obtained from elements within organizations or be
contracted to public or private sector entities outside of organizations. Authorizing officials
determine the required level of independence based on the security categories of systems
and/or the risk to organizational operations, organizational assets, or individuals. Authorizing
officials also determine if the level of assessor independence provides sufficient assurance
that the results are sound and can be used to make credible, risk-based decisions. Assessor
independence determination includes whether contracted assessment services have
sufficient independence, such as when system owners are not directly involved in
contracting processes or cannot influence the impartiality of the assessors conducting the
assessments. During the system design and development phase, having independent
assessors is analogous to having independent SMEs involved in design reviews.
When organizations that own the systems are small or the structures of the organizations
require that assessments be conducted by individuals that are in the developmental,
operational, or management chain of the system owners, independence in assessment
processes can be achieved by ensuring that assessment results are carefully reviewed and
analyzed by independent teams of experts to validate the completeness, accuracy, integrity,
and reliability of the results. Assessments performed for purposes other than to support
authorization decisions are more likely to be useable for such decisions when performed by
assessors with sufficient independence, thereby reducing the need to repeat assessments.
CONTROL ASSESSMENTS | SPECIALIZED ASSESSMENTS
Include as part of control assessments, [Assignment: organization-defined frequency],
[Selection: announced; unannounced], [Selection (one or more): in-depth monitoring;
security instrumentation; automated security test cases; vulnerability scanning; malicious
user testing; insider threat assessment; performance and load testing; data leakage or
data loss assessment; [Assignment: organization-defined other forms of assessment]].
Discussion: Organizations can conduct specialized assessments, including verification and
validation, system monitoring, insider threat assessments, malicious user testing, and other
forms of testing. These assessments can improve readiness by exercising organizational
capabilities and indicating current levels of performance as a means of focusing actions to
improve security and privacy. Organizations conduct specialized assessments in accordance
with applicable laws, executive orders, directives, regulations, policies, standards, and
guidelines. Authorizing officials approve the assessment methods in coordination with the
organizational risk executive function. Organizations can include vulnerabilities uncovered
during assessments into vulnerability remediation processes. Specialized assessments can
also be conducted early in the system development life cycle (e.g., during initial design,
development, and unit testing)
CONTROL ASSESSMENTS | LEVERAGING RESULTS FROM EXTERNAL ORGANIZATIONS
Leverage the results of control assessments performed by [Assignment: organizationdefined external organization] on [Assignment: organization-defined system] when the
assessment meets [Assignment: organization-defined requirements].
Discussion: Organizations may rely on control assessments of organizational systems by
other (external) organizations. Using such assessments and reusing existing assessment
evidence can decrease the time and resources required for assessments by limiting the
independent assessment activities that organizations need to perform. The factors that
organizations consider in determining whether to accept assessment results from external
organizations can vary. Such factors include the organization’s past experience with the
organization that conducted the assessment, the reputation of the assessment organization,
the level of detail of supporting assessment evidence provided, and mandates imposed by
applicable laws, executive orders, directives, regulations, policies, standards, and guidelines.
Accredited testing laboratories that support the Common Criteria Program [ISO 15408-1],
the NIST Cryptographic Module Validation Program (CMVP), or the NIST Cryptographic
Algorithm Validation Program (CAVP) can provide independent assessment results that
organizations can leverage.
CONTINUOUS MONITORING
Control: Develop a system-level continuous monitoring strategy and implement continuous
monitoring in accordance with the organization-level continuous monitoring strategy that
includes:
a. Establishing the following system-level metrics to be monitored: [Assignment: organizationdefined system-level metrics];
b. Establishing [Assignment: organization-defined frequencies] for monitoring and
[Assignment: organization-defined frequencies] for assessment of control effectiveness;
c. Ongoing control assessments in accordance with the continuous monitoring strategy;
d. Ongoing monitoring of system and organization-defined metrics in accordance with the
continuous monitoring strategy;
e. Correlation and analysis of information generated by control assessments and monitoring;
f. Response actions to address results of the analysis of control assessment and monitoring
information; and
g. Reporting the security and privacy status of the system to [Assignment: organizationdefined personnel or roles] [Assignment: organization-defined frequency].
Discussion: Continuous monitoring at the system level facilitates ongoing awareness of the
system security and privacy posture to support organizational risk management decisions. The
terms “continuous” and “ongoing” imply that organizations assess and monitor their controls
and risks at a frequency sufficient to support risk-based decisions. Different types of controls may
require different monitoring frequencies. The results of continuous monitoring generate risk
response actions by organizations. When monitoring the effectiveness of multiple controls that
have been grouped into capabilities, a root-cause analysis may be needed to determine the
specific control that has failed. Continuous monitoring programs allow organizations to maintain
the authorizations of systems and common controls in highly dynamic environments of operation
with changing mission and business needs, threats, vulnerabilities, and technologies. Having
access to security and privacy information on a continuing basis through reports and dashboards
gives organizational officials the ability to make effective and timely risk management decisions,
including ongoing authorization decisions.
Automation supports more frequent updates to hardware, software, and firmware inventories,
authorization packages, and other system information. Effectiveness is further enhanced when
continuous monitoring outputs are formatted to provide information that is specific, measurable,
actionable, relevant, and timely. Continuous monitoring activities are scaled in accordance with
the security categories of systems. Monitoring requirements, including the need for specific
monitoring, may be referenced in other controls and control enhancements,
CONTINUOUS MONITORING | INDEPENDENT ASSESSMENT
Employ independent assessors or assessment teams to monitor the controls in the system
on an ongoing basis.
Discussion: Organizations maximize the value of control assessments by requiring that
assessments be conducted by assessors with appropriate levels of independence. The level
of required independence is based on organizational continuous monitoring strategies.
Assessor independence provides a degree of impartiality to the monitoring process. To
achieve such impartiality, assessors do not create a mutual or conflicting interest with the
organizations where the assessments are being conducted, assess their own work, act as
management or employees of the organizations they are serving, or place themselves in
advocacy positions for the organizations acquiring their services.
CONTINUOUS MONITORING | TREND ANALYSES
Employ trend analyses to determine if control implementations, the frequency of
continuous monitoring activities, and the types of activities used in the continuous
monitoring process need to be modified based on empirical data.
Discussion: Trend analyses include examining recent threat information that addresses the
types of threat events that have occurred in the organization or the Federal Government,
success rates of certain types of attacks, emerging vulnerabilities in technologies, evolving
social engineering techniques, the effectiveness of configuration settings, results from
multiple control assessments, and findings from Inspectors General or auditors
CONTINUOUS MONITORING | RISK MONITORING
Ensure risk monitoring is an integral part of the continuous monitoring strategy that
includes the following:
(a) Effectiveness monitoring;
(b) Compliance monitoring; and
(c) Change monitoring.
Discussion: Risk monitoring is informed by the established organizational risk tolerance.
Effectiveness monitoring determines the ongoing effectiveness of the implemented risk
response measures. Compliance monitoring verifies that required risk response measures
are implemented. It also verifies that security and privacy requirements are satisfied. Change
monitoring identifies changes to organizational systems and environments of operation that
may affect security and privacy risk.
CONTINUOUS MONITORING | CONSISTENCY ANALYSIS
Employ the following actions to validate that policies are established and implemented
controls are operating in a consistent manner: [Assignment: organization-defined actions].
Discussion: Security and privacy controls are often added incrementally to a system. As a
result, policies for selecting and implementing controls may be inconsistent, and the controls
could fail to work together in a consistent or coordinated manner. At a minimum, the lack of
consistency and coordination could mean that there are unacceptable security and privacy
gaps in the system. At worst, it could mean that some of the controls implemented in one
location or by one component are actually impeding the functionality of other controls (e.g.,
encrypting internal network traffic can impede monitoring). In other situations, failing to
consistently monitor all implemented network protocols (e.g., a dual stack of IPv4 and IPv6)
may create unintended vulnerabilities in the system that could be exploited by adversaries.
It is important to validate—through testing, monitoring, and analysis—that the implemented
controls are operating in a consistent, coordinated, non-interfering manner.
) CONTINUOUS MONITORING | AUTOMATION SUPPORT FOR MONITORING
Ensure the accuracy, currency, and availability of monitoring results for the system using
[Assignment: organization-defined automated mechanisms].
Discussion: Using automated tools for monitoring helps to maintain the accuracy, currency,
and availability of monitoring information which in turns helps to increase the level of
ongoing awareness of the system security and privacy posture in support of organizational
risk management decisions.
VULNERABILITY MONITORING AND SCANNING
Control:
a. Monitor and scan for vulnerabilities in the system and hosted applications [Assignment:
organization-defined frequency and/or randomly in accordance with organization-defined
process] and when new vulnerabilities potentially affecting the system are identified and
reported;
b. Employ vulnerability monitoring tools and techniques that facilitate interoperability among
tools and automate parts of the vulnerability management process by using standards for:
1. Enumerating platforms, software flaws, and improper configurations;
2. Formatting checklists and test procedures; and
3. Measuring vulnerability impact;
c. Analyze vulnerability scan reports and results from vulnerability monitoring;
d. Remediate legitimate vulnerabilities [Assignment: organization-defined response times] in
accordance with an organizational assessment of risk;
e. Share information obtained from the vulnerability monitoring process and control
assessments with [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles] to help eliminate
similar vulnerabilities in other systems; and
f. Employ vulnerability monitoring tools that include the capability to readily update the
vulnerabilities to be scanned.
Discussion: Security categorization of information and systems guides the frequency and
comprehensiveness of vulnerability monitoring (including scans). Organizations determine the
required vulnerability monitoring for system components, ensuring that the potential sources of
vulnerabilities—such as infrastructure components (e.g., switches, routers, guards, sensors),
networked printers, scanners, and copiers—are not overlooked. The capability to readily update
vulnerability monitoring tools as new vulnerabilities are discovered and announced and as new
scanning methods are developed helps to ensure that new vulnerabilities are not missed by
employed vulnerability monitoring tools. The vulnerability monitoring tool update process helps
to ensure that potential vulnerabilities in the system are identified and addressed as quickly as
possible. Vulnerability monitoring and analyses for custom software may require additional
approaches, such as static analysis, dynamic analysis, binary analysis, or a hybrid of the three
approaches. Organizations can use these analysis approaches in source code reviews and in a
variety of tools, including web-based application scanners, static analysis tools, and binary
analyzers.
Vulnerability monitoring includes scanning for patch levels; scanning for functions, ports,
protocols, and services that should not be accessible to users or devices; and scanning for flow
control mechanisms that are improperly configured or operating incorrectly. Vulnerability
monitoring may also include continuous vulnerability monitoring tools that use instrumentation
to continuously analyze components. Instrumentation-based tools may improve accuracy and
may be run throughout an organization without scanning. Vulnerability monitoring tools that
facilitate interoperability include tools that are Security Content Automated Protocol (SCAP)-
validated. Thus, organizations consider using scanning tools that express vulnerabilities in the
Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures (CVE) naming convention and that employ the Open
Vulnerability Assessment Language (OVAL) to determine the presence of vulnerabilities. Sources
for vulnerability information include the Common Weakness Enumeration (CWE) listing and the
National Vulnerability Database (NVD). Control assessments, such as red team exercises, provide
additional sources of potential vulnerabilities for which to scan. Organizations also consider using
scanning tools that express vulnerability impact by the Common Vulnerability Scoring System
(CVSS).
Vulnerability monitoring includes a channel and process for receiving reports of security
vulnerabilities from the public at-large. Vulnerability disclosure programs can be as simple as
publishing a monitored email address or web form that can receive reports, including notification
authorizing good-faith research and disclosure of security vulnerabilities. Organizations generally
expect that such research is happening with or without their authorization and can use public
vulnerability disclosure channels to increase the likelihood that discovered vulnerabilities are
reported directly to the organization for remediation.
Organizations may also employ the use of financial incentives (also known as “bug bounties”) to
further encourage external security researchers to report discovered vulnerabilities. Bug bounty
programs can be tailored to the organization’s needs. Bounties can be operated indefinitely or
over a defined period of time and can be offered to the general public or to a curated group.
Organizations may run public and private bounties simultaneously and could choose to offer
partially credentialed access to certain participants in order to evaluate security vulnerabilities
from privileged vantage points
VULNERABILITY MONITORING AND SCANNING | UPDATE VULNERABILITIES TO BE SCANNED
Update the system vulnerabilities to be scanned [Selection (one or more): [Assignment:
organization-defined frequency]; prior to a new scan; when new vulnerabilities are
identified and reported].
Discussion: Due to the complexity of modern software, systems, and other factors, new
vulnerabilities are discovered on a regular basis. It is important that newly discovered
vulnerabilities are added to the list of vulnerabilities to be scanned to ensure that the
organization can take steps to mitigate those vulnerabilities in a timely manner.
VULNERABILITY MONITORING AND SCANNING | BREADTH AND DEPTH OF COVERAGE
Define the breadth and depth of vulnerability scanning coverage.
Discussion: The breadth of vulnerability scanning coverage can be expressed as a
percentage of components within the system, by the particular types of systems, by the
criticality of systems, or by the number of vulnerabilities to be checked. Conversely, the
depth of vulnerability scanning coverage can be expressed as the level of the system design
that the organization intends to monitor (e.g., component, module, subsystem, element).
Organizations can determine the sufficiency of vulnerability scanning coverage with regard
to its risk tolerance and other factors. Scanning tools and how the tools are configured may
affect the depth and coverage. Multiple scanning tools may be needed to achieve the
desired depth and coverage. [SP 800-53A] provides additional information on the breadth
and depth of coverage.
VULNERABILITY MONITORING AND SCANNING | DISCOVERABLE INFORMATION
Determine information about the system that is discoverable and take [Assignment:
organization-defined corrective actions].
Discussion: Discoverable information includes information that adversaries could obtain
without compromising or breaching the system, such as by collecting information that the
system is exposing or by conducting extensive web searches. Corrective actions include
notifying appropriate organizational personnel, removing designated information, or
changing the system to make the designated information less relevant or attractive to
adversaries. This enhancement excludes intentionally discoverable information that may be
part of a decoy capability (e.g., honeypots, honeynets, or deception nets) deployed by the
organization.
) VULNERABILITY MONITORING AND SCANNING | PRIVILEGED ACCESS
Implement privileged access authorization to [Assignment: organization-defined system
components] for [Assignment: organization-defined vulnerability scanning activities].
Discussion: In certain situations, the nature of the vulnerability scanning may be more
intrusive, or the system component that is the subject of the scanning may contain classified
or controlled unclassified information, such as personally identifiable information. Privileged
access authorization to selected system components facilitates more thorough vulnerability
scanning and protects the sensitive nature of such scanning.
VULNERABILITY MONITORING AND SCANNING | AUTOMATED TREND ANALYSES
Compare the results of multiple vulnerability scans using [Assignment: organizationdefined automated mechanisms].
Discussion: Using automated mechanisms to analyze multiple vulnerability scans over time
can help determine trends in system vulnerabilities and identify patterns of attack.
VULNERABILITY MONITORING AND SCANNING | REVIEW HISTORIC AUDIT LOGS
Review historic audit logs to determine if a vulnerability identified in a [Assignment:
organization-defined system] has been previously exploited within an [Assignment:
organization-defined time period].
Discussion: Reviewing historic audit logs to determine if a recently detected vulnerability in
a system has been previously exploited by an adversary can provide important information
for forensic analyses. Such analyses can help identify, for example, the extent of a previous
intrusion, the trade craft employed during the attack, organizational information exfiltrated
or modified, mission or business capabilities affected, and the duration of the attack.
VULNERABILITY MONITORING AND SCANNING | CORRELATE SCANNING INFORMATION
Correlate the output from vulnerability scanning tools to determine the presence of multivulnerability and multi-hop attack vectors.
Discussion: An attack vector is a path or means by which an adversary can gain access to a
system in order to deliver malicious code or exfiltrate information. Organizations can use
attack trees to show how hostile activities by adversaries interact and combine to produce
adverse impacts or negative consequences to systems and organizations. Such information,
together with correlated data from vulnerability scanning tools, can provide greater clarity
regarding multi-vulnerability and multi-hop attack vectors. The correlation of vulnerability
scanning information is especially important when organizations are transitioning from older
technologies to newer technologies (e.g., transitioning from IPv4 to IPv6 network protocols).
During such transitions, some system components may inadvertently be unmanaged and
create opportunities for adversary exploitation.
) VULNERABILITY MONITORING AND SCANNING | PUBLIC DISCLOSURE PROGRAM
Establish a public reporting channel for receiving reports of vulnerabilities in
organizational systems and system components.
Discussion: The reporting channel is publicly discoverable and contains clear language
authorizing good-faith research and the disclosure of vulnerabilities to the organization. The
organization does not condition its authorization on an expectation of indefinite nondisclosure to the public by the reporting entity but may request a specific time period to
properly remediate the vulnerability
SYSTEM MONITORING
Control:
a. Monitor the system to detect:
1. Attacks and indicators of potential attacks in accordance with the following monitoring
objectives: [Assignment: organization-defined monitoring objectives]; and
2. Unauthorized local, network, and remote connections;
b. Identify unauthorized use of the system through the following techniques and methods:
[Assignment: organization-defined techniques and methods];
c. Invoke internal monitoring capabilities or deploy monitoring devices:
1. Strategically within the system to collect organization-determined essential information;
and
2. At ad hoc locations within the system to track specific types of transactions of interest
to the organization;
d. Analyze detected events and anomalies;
e. Adjust the level of system monitoring activity when there is a change in risk to organizational
operations and assets, individuals, other organizations, or the Nation;
f. Obtain legal opinion regarding system monitoring activities; and
g. Provide [Assignment: organization-defined system monitoring information] to [Assignment:
organization-defined personnel or roles] [Selection (one or more): as needed; [Assignment:
organization-defined frequency]].
Discussion: System monitoring includes external and internal monitoring. External monitoring
includes the observation of events occurring at external interfaces to the system. Internal
monitoring includes the observation of events occurring within the system. Organizations
monitor systems by observing audit activities in real time or by observing other system aspects
such as access patterns, characteristics of access, and other actions. The monitoring objectives
guide and inform the determination of the events. System monitoring capabilities are achieved
through a variety of tools and techniques, including intrusion detection and prevention systems,
malicious code protection software, scanning tools, audit record monitoring software, and
network monitoring software.
Depending on the security architecture, the distribution and configuration of monitoring devices
may impact throughput at key internal and external boundaries as well as at other locations
across a network due to the introduction of network throughput latency. If throughput
management is needed, such devices are strategically located and deployed as part of an
established organization-wide security architecture. Strategic locations for monitoring devices
include selected perimeter locations and near key servers and server farms that support critical
applications. Monitoring devices are typically employed at the managed interfaces associated
with controls SC-7 and AC-17. The information collected is a function of the organizational
monitoring objectives and the capability of systems to support such objectives. Specific types of
transactions of interest include Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) traffic that bypasses HTTP
proxies. System monitoring is an integral part of organizational continuous monitoring and
incident response programs, and output from system monitoring serves as input to those
programs. System monitoring requirements, including the need for specific types of system
monitoring, may be referenced in other controls
Adjustments to levels of system monitoring are based on law enforcement information,
intelligence information, or other sources of information. The legality of system monitoring
activities is based on applicable laws, executive orders, directives, regulations, policies,
standards, and guidelines.
SYSTEM MONITORING | SYSTEM-WIDE INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM
Connect and configure individual intrusion detection tools into a system-wide intrusion
detection system.
Discussion: Linking individual intrusion detection tools into a system-wide intrusion
detection system provides additional coverage and effective detection capabilities. The
information contained in one intrusion detection tool can be shared widely across the
organization, making the system-wide detection capability more robust and powerful.
SYSTEM MONITORING | AUTOMATED TOOLS AND MECHANISMS FOR REAL-TIME ANALYSIS
Employ automated tools and mechanisms to support near real-time analysis of events.
Discussion: Automated tools and mechanisms include host-based, network-based,
transport-based, or storage-based event monitoring tools and mechanisms or security
information and event management (SIEM) technologies that provide real-time analysis of
alerts and notifications generated by organizational systems. Automated monitoring
techniques can create unintended privacy risks because automated controls may connect to
external or otherwise unrelated systems. The matching of records between these systems
may create linkages with unintended consequences. Organizations assess and document
these risks in their privacy impact assessment and make determinations that are in
alignment with their privacy program plan.
SYSTEM MONITORING | AUTOMATED TOOL AND MECHANISM INTEGRATION
Employ automated tools and mechanisms to integrate intrusion detection tools and
mechanisms into access control and flow control mechanisms.
Discussion: Using automated tools and mechanisms to integrate intrusion detection tools
and mechanisms into access and flow control mechanisms facilitates a rapid response to
attacks by enabling the reconfiguration of mechanisms in support of attack isolation and
elimination.
SYSTEM MONITORING | INBOUND AND OUTBOUND COMMUNICATIONS TRAFFIC
(a) Determine criteria for unusual or unauthorized activities or conditions for inbound
and outbound communications traffic;
(b) Monitor inbound and outbound communications traffic [Assignment: organizationdefined frequency] for [Assignment: organization-defined unusual or unauthorized
activities or conditions].
Discussion: Unusual or unauthorized activities or conditions related to system inbound and
outbound communications traffic includes internal traffic that indicates the presence of
malicious code or unauthorized use of legitimate code or credentials within organizational
systems or propagating among system components, signaling to external systems, and the
unauthorized exporting of information. Evidence of malicious code or unauthorized use of
legitimate code or credentials is used to identify potentially compromised systems or system
components.
SYSTEM MONITORING | SYSTEM-GENERATED ALERTS
Alert [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles] when the following systemgenerated indications of compromise or potential compromise occur: [Assignment:
organization-defined compromise indicators].
Discussion: Alerts may be generated from a variety of sources, including audit records or
inputs from malicious code protection mechanisms, intrusion detection or prevention
mechanisms, or boundary protection devices such as firewalls, gateways, and routers. Alerts
can be automated and may be transmitted telephonically, by electronic mail messages, or by
text messaging. Organizational personnel on the alert notification list can include system
administrators, mission or business owners, system owners, information owners/stewards,
senior agency information security officers, senior agency officials for privacy, system
security officers, or privacy officers. In contrast to alerts generated by the system, alerts
generated by organizations in SI-4(12) focus on information sources external to the system,
such as suspicious activity reports and reports on potential insider threats.
SYSTEM MONITORING | AUTOMATED RESPONSE TO SUSPICIOUS EVENTS
(a) Notify [Assignment: organization-defined incident response personnel (identified by
name and/or by role)] of detected suspicious events; and
(b) Take the following actions upon detection: [Assignment: organization-defined leastdisruptive actions to terminate suspicious events].
Discussion: Least-disruptive actions include initiating requests for human responses.
SYSTEM MONITORING | TESTING OF MONITORING TOOLS AND MECHANISMS
Test intrusion-monitoring tools and mechanisms [Assignment: organization-defined
frequency].
Discussion: Testing intrusion-monitoring tools and mechanisms is necessary to ensure that
the tools and mechanisms are operating correctly and continue to satisfy the monitoring
objectives of organizations. The frequency and depth of testing depends on the types of
tools and mechanisms used by organizations and the methods of deployment.
SYSTEM MONITORING | VISIBILITY OF ENCRYPTED COMMUNICATIONS
Make provisions so that [Assignment: organization-defined encrypted communications
traffic] is visible to [Assignment: organization-defined system monitoring tools and
mechanisms].
Discussion: Organizations balance the need to encrypt communications traffic to protect
data confidentiality with the need to maintain visibility into such traffic from a monitoring
perspective. Organizations determine whether the visibility requirement applies to internal
encrypted traffic, encrypted traffic intended for external destinations, or a subset of the
traffic types.
SYSTEM MONITORING | ANALYZE COMMUNICATIONS TRAFFIC ANOMALIES
Analyze outbound communications traffic at the external interfaces to the system and
selected [Assignment: organization-defined interior points within the system] to discover
anomalies.
Discussion: Organization-defined interior points include subnetworks and subsystems.
Anomalies within organizational systems include large file transfers, long-time persistent
connections, attempts to access information from unexpected locations, the use of unusual
protocols and ports, the use of unmonitored network protocols (e.g., IPv6 usage during IPv4
transition), and attempted communications with suspected malicious external addresses.
) SYSTEM MONITORING | AUTOMATED ORGANIZATION-GENERATED ALERTS
Alert [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles] using [Assignment:
organization-defined automated mechanisms] when the following indications of
inappropriate or unusual activities with security or privacy implications occur:
[Assignment: organization-defined activities that trigger alerts].
Discussion: Organizational personnel on the system alert notification list include system
administrators, mission or business owners, system owners, senior agency information
security officer, senior agency official for privacy, system security officers, or privacy officers.
Automated organization-generated alerts are the security alerts generated by organizations
and transmitted using automated means. The sources for organization-generated alerts are
focused on other entities such as suspicious activity reports and reports on potential insider
threats. In contrast to alerts generated by the organization, alerts generated by the system
in SI-4(5) focus on information sources that are internal to the systems, such as audit
records.
SYSTEM MONITORING | ANALYZE TRAFFIC AND EVENT PATTERNS
(a) Analyze communications traffic and event patterns for the system;
(b) Develop profiles representing common traffic and event patterns; and
(c) Use the traffic and event profiles in tuning system-monitoring devices.
Discussion: Identifying and understanding common communications traffic and event
patterns help organizations provide useful information to system monitoring devices to
more effectively identify suspicious or anomalous traffic and events when they occur. Such
information can help reduce the number of false positives and false negatives during system
monitoring
SYSTEM MONITORING | WIRELESS INTRUSION DETECTION
Employ a wireless intrusion detection system to identify rogue wireless devices and to
detect attack attempts and potential compromises or breaches to the system.
Discussion: Wireless signals may radiate beyond organizational facilities. Organizations
proactively search for unauthorized wireless connections, including the conduct of thorough
scans for unauthorized wireless access points. Wireless scans are not limited to those areas
within facilities containing systems but also include areas outside of facilities to verify that
unauthorized wireless access points are not connected to organizational systems.
SYSTEM MONITORING | WIRELESS TO WIRELINE COMMUNICATIONS
Employ an intrusion detection system to monitor wireless communications traffic as the
traffic passes from wireless to wireline networks.
Discussion: Wireless networks are inherently less secure than wired networks. For example,
wireless networks are more susceptible to eavesdroppers or traffic analysis than wireline
networks. When wireless to wireline communications exist, the wireless network could
become a port of entry into the wired network. Given the greater facility of unauthorized
network access via wireless access points compared to unauthorized wired network access
from within the physical boundaries of the system, additional monitoring of transitioning
traffic between wireless and wired networks may be necessary to detect malicious activities.
Employing intrusion detection systems to monitor wireless communications traffic helps to
ensure that the traffic does not contain malicious code prior to transitioning to the wireline
network.
SYSTEM MONITORING | CORRELATE MONITORING INFORMATION
Correlate information from monitoring tools and mechanisms employed throughout the
system.
Discussion: Correlating information from different system monitoring tools and mechanisms
can provide a more comprehensive view of system activity. Correlating system monitoring
tools and mechanisms that typically work in isolation—including malicious code protection
software, host monitoring, and network monitoring—can provide an organization-wide
monitoring view and may reveal otherwise unseen attack patterns. Understanding the
capabilities and limitations of diverse monitoring tools and mechanisms and how to
maximize the use of information generated by those tools and mechanisms can help
organizations develop, operate, and maintain effective monitoring programs. The correlation
of monitoring information is especially important during the transition from older to newer
technologies (e.g., transitioning from IPv4 to IPv6 network protocols)
SYSTEM MONITORING | INTEGRATED SITUATIONAL AWARENESS
Correlate information from monitoring physical, cyber, and supply chain activities to
achieve integrated, organization-wide situational awareness.
Discussion: Correlating monitoring information from a more diverse set of information
sources helps to achieve integrated situational awareness. Integrated situational awareness
from a combination of physical, cyber, and supply chain monitoring activities enhances the
capability of organizations to more quickly detect sophisticated attacks and investigate the
methods and techniques employed to carry out such attacks. In contrast to SI-4(16), which
correlates the various cyber monitoring information, integrated situational awareness is
intended to correlate monitoring beyond the cyber domain. Correlation of monitoring
information from multiple activities may help reveal attacks on organizations that are
operating across multiple attack vectors.
SYSTEM MONITORING | ANALYZE TRAFFIC AND COVERT EXFILTRATION
Analyze outbound communications traffic at external interfaces to the system and at the
following interior points to detect covert exfiltration of information: [Assignment:
organization-defined interior points within the system].
Discussion: Organization-defined interior points include subnetworks and subsystems.
Covert means that can be used to exfiltrate information include steganography.
SYSTEM MONITORING | RISK FOR INDIVIDUALS
Implement [Assignment: organization-defined additional monitoring] of individuals who
have been identified by [Assignment: organization-defined sources] as posing an increased
level of risk.
Discussion: Indications of increased risk from individuals can be obtained from different
sources, including personnel records, intelligence agencies, law enforcement organizations,
and other sources. The monitoring of individuals is coordinated with the management, legal,
security, privacy, and human resource officials who conduct such monitoring. Monitoring is
conducted in accordance with applicable laws, executive orders, directives, regulations,
policies, standards, and guidelines
SYSTEM MONITORING | PRIVILEGED USERS
Implement the following additional monitoring of privileged users: [Assignment:
organization-defined additional monitoring].
Discussion: Privileged users have access to more sensitive information, including securityrelated information, than the general user population. Access to such information means
that privileged users can potentially do greater damage to systems and organizations than
non-privileged users. Therefore, implementing additional monitoring on privileged users
helps to ensure that organizations can identify malicious activity at the earliest possible time
and take appropriate actions.
SYSTEM MONITORING | PROBATIONARY PERIODS
Implement the following additional monitoring of individuals during [Assignment:
organization-defined probationary period]: [Assignment: organization-defined additional
monitoring].
Discussion: During probationary periods, employees do not have permanent employment
status within organizations. Without such status or access to information that is resident on
the system, additional monitoring can help identify any potentially malicious activity or
inappropriate behavior.
) SYSTEM MONITORING | UNAUTHORIZED NETWORK SERVICES
(a) Detect network services that have not been authorized or approved by [Assignment:
organization-defined authorization or approval processes]; and
(b) [Selection (one or more): Audit; Alert [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or
roles]] when detected.
Discussion: Unauthorized or unapproved network services include services in serviceoriented architectures that lack organizational verification or validation and may therefore
be unreliable or serve as malicious rogues for valid services.
SYSTEM MONITORING | HOST-BASED DEVICES
Implement the following host-based monitoring mechanisms at [Assignment:
organization-defined system components]: [Assignment: organization-defined host-based
monitoring mechanisms].
Discussion: Host-based monitoring collects information about the host (or system in which it
resides). System components in which host-based monitoring can be implemented include
servers, notebook computers, and mobile devices. Organizations may consider employing
host-based monitoring mechanisms from multiple product developers or vendors.
) SYSTEM MONITORING | INDICATORS OF COMPROMISE
Discover, collect, and distribute to [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles],
indicators of compromise provided by [Assignment: organization-defined sources].
Discussion: Indicators of compromise (IOC) are forensic artifacts from intrusions that are
identified on organizational systems at the host or network level. IOCs provide valuable
information on systems that have been compromised. IOCs can include the creation of
registry key values. IOCs for network traffic include Universal Resource Locator or protocol
elements that indicate malicious code command and control servers. The rapid distribution
and adoption of IOCs can improve information security by reducing the time that systems
and organizations are vulnerable to the same exploit or attack. Threat indicators, signatures,
tactics, techniques, procedures, and other indicators of compromise may be available via
government and non-government cooperatives, including the Forum of Incident Response
and Security Teams, the United States Computer Emergency Readiness Team, the Defense
Industrial Base Cybersecurity Information Sharing Program, and the CERT Coordination
Center
SYSTEM MONITORING | OPTIMIZE NETWORK TRAFFIC ANALYSIS
Provide visibility into network traffic at external and key internal system interfaces to
optimize the effectiveness of monitoring devices.
Discussion: Encrypted traffic, asymmetric routing architectures, capacity and latency
limitations, and transitioning from older to newer technologies (e.g., IPv4 to IPv6 network
protocol transition) may result in blind spots for organizations when analyzing network
traffic. Collecting, decrypting, pre-processing, and distributing only relevant traffic to
monitoring devices can streamline the efficiency and use of devices and optimize traffic
analysis.
