PR.PT-1: Audit/log records are determined, documented, implemented, and reviewed in accordance with policy
AUDIT AND ACCOUNTABILITY
POLICY AND PROCEDURES
Control:
a. Develop, document, and disseminate to [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or
roles]:
1. [Selection (one or more): Organization-level; Mission/business process-level; Systemlevel] audit and accountability policy that:
(a) Addresses purpose, scope, roles, responsibilities, management commitment,
coordination among organizational entities, and compliance; and
(b) Is consistent with applicable laws, executive orders, directives, regulations, policies,
standards, and guidelines; and
2. Procedures to facilitate the implementation of the audit and accountability policy and
the associated audit and accountability controls;
b. Designate an [Assignment: organization-defined official] to manage the development,
documentation, and dissemination of the audit and accountability policy and procedures;
and
c. Review and update the current audit and accountability:
1. Policy [Assignment: organization-defined frequency] and following [Assignment:
organization-defined events]; and
2. Procedures [Assignment: organization-defined frequency] and following [Assignment:
organization-defined events].
Discussion: Audit and accountability policy and procedures address the controls in the AU family
that are implemented within systems and organizations. The risk management strategy is an
important factor in establishing such policies and procedures. Policies and procedures contribute
to security and privacy assurance. Therefore, it is important that security and privacy programs
collaborate on the development of audit and accountability policy and procedures. Security and
privacy program policies and procedures at the organization level are preferable, in general, and
may obviate the need for mission- or system-specific policies and procedures. The policy can be
included as part of the general security and privacy policy or be represented by multiple policies
that reflect the complex nature of organizations. Procedures can be established for security and
privacy programs, for mission or business processes, and for systems, if needed. Procedures
describe how the policies or controls are implemented and can be directed at the individual or
role that is the object of the procedure. Procedures can be documented in system security and
privacy plans or in one or more separate documents. Events that may precipitate an update to
audit and accountability policy and procedures include assessment or audit findings, security
incidents or breaches, or changes in applicable laws, executive orders, directives, regulations,
policies, standards, and guidelines. Simply restating controls does not constitute an
organizational policy or procedure.
EVENT LOGGING
Control:
a. Identify the types of events that the system is capable of logging in support of the audit
function: [Assignment: organization-defined event types that the system is capable of
logging];
b. Coordinate the event logging function with other organizational entities requiring auditrelated information to guide and inform the selection criteria for events to be logged;
c. Specify the following event types for logging within the system: [Assignment: organizationdefined event types (subset of the event types defined in AU-2a.) along with the frequency of
(or situation requiring) logging for each identified event type];
d. Provide a rationale for why the event types selected for logging are deemed to be adequate
to support after-the-fact investigations of incidents; and
e. Review and update the event types selected for logging [Assignment: organization-defined
frequency].
Discussion: An event is an observable occurrence in a system. The types of events that require
logging are those events that are significant and relevant to the security of systems and the
privacy of individuals. Event logging also supports specific monitoring and auditing needs. Event
types include password changes, failed logons or failed accesses related to systems, security or
privacy attribute changes, administrative privilege usage, PIV credential usage, data action
changes, query parameters, or external credential usage. In determining the set of event types
that require logging, organizations consider the monitoring and auditing appropriate for each of
the controls to be implemented. For completeness, event logging includes all protocols that are
operational and supported by the system.
To balance monitoring and auditing requirements with other system needs, event logging
requires identifying the subset of event types that are logged at a given point in time. For
example, organizations may determine that systems need the capability to log every file access
successful and unsuccessful, but not activate that capability except for specific circumstances due
to the potential burden on system performance. The types of events that organizations desire to
be logged may change. Reviewing and updating the set of logged events is necessary to help
ensure that the events remain relevant and continue to support the needs of the organization.
Organizations consider how the types of logging events can reveal information about individuals
that may give rise to privacy risk and how best to mitigate such risks. For example, there is the
potential to reveal personally identifiable information in the audit trail, especially if the logging
event is based on patterns or time of usage.
Event logging requirements, including the need to log specific event types, may be referenced in
other controls and control enhancements. These include AC-2(4), AC-3(10), AC-6(9), AC-17(1),
CM-3f, CM-5(1), IA-3(3.b), MA-4(1), MP-4(2), PE-3, PM-21, PT-7, RA-8, SC-7(9), SC-7(15), SI-3(8),
SI-4(22), SI-7(8), and SI-10(1). Organizations include event types that are required by applicable
laws, executive orders, directives, policies, regulations, standards, and guidelines. Audit records
can be generated at various levels, including at the packet level as information traverses the
network. Selecting the appropriate level of event logging is an important part of a monitoring
and auditing capability and can identify the root causes of problems. When defining event types,
organizations consider the logging necessary to cover related event types, such as the steps in
distributed, transaction-based processes and the actions that occur in service-oriented
architectures.
CONTENT OF AUDIT RECORDS
Control: Ensure that audit records contain information that establishes the following:
a. What type of event occurred;
b. When the event occurred;
c. Where the event occurred;
d. Source of the event;
e. Outcome of the event; and
f. Identity of any individuals, subjects, or objects/entities associated with the event.
Discussion: Audit record content that may be necessary to support the auditing function
includes event descriptions (item a), time stamps (item b), source and destination addresses
(item c), user or process identifiers (items d and f), success or fail indications (item e), and
filenames involved (items a, c, e, and f) . Event outcomes include indicators of event success or
failure and event-specific results, such as the system security and privacy posture after the event
occurred. Organizations consider how audit records can reveal information about individuals that
may give rise to privacy risks and how best to mitigate such risks. For example, there is the
potential to reveal personally identifiable information in the audit trail, especially if the trail
records inputs or is based on patterns or time of usage.
AUDIT LOG STORAGE CAPACITY
Control: Allocate audit log storage capacity to accommodate [Assignment: organization-defined
audit log retention requirements].
Discussion: Organizations consider the types of audit logging to be performed and the audit log
processing requirements when allocating audit log storage capacity. Allocating sufficient audit
log storage capacity reduces the likelihood of such capacity being exceeded and resulting in the
potential loss or reduction of audit logging capability.
RESPONSE TO AUDIT LOGGING PROCESS FAILURES
Control:
a. Alert [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles] within [Assignment:
organization-defined time period] in the event of an audit logging process failure; and
b. Take the following additional actions: [Assignment: organization-defined additional actions].
Discussion: Audit logging process failures include software and hardware errors, failures in audit
log capturing mechanisms, and reaching or exceeding audit log storage capacity. Organizationdefined actions include overwriting oldest audit records, shutting down the system, and stopping
the generation of audit records. Organizations may choose to define additional actions for audit
logging process failures based on the type of failure, the location of the failure, the severity of
the failure, or a combination of such factors. When the audit logging process failure is related to
storage, the response is carried out for the audit log storage repository (i.e., the distinct system
component where the audit logs are stored), the system on which the audit logs reside, the total
audit log storage capacity of the organization (i.e., all audit log storage repositories combined), or
all three. Organizations may decide to take no additional actions after alerting designated roles
or personnel.
AUDIT RECORD REVIEW, ANALYSIS, AND REPORTING
Control:
a. Review and analyze system audit records [Assignment: organization-defined frequency] for
indications of [Assignment: organization-defined inappropriate or unusual activity] and the
potential impact of the inappropriate or unusual activity;
b. Report findings to [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles]; and
c. Adjust the level of audit record review, analysis, and reporting within the system when there
is a change in risk based on law enforcement information, intelligence information, or other
credible sources of information.
Discussion: Audit record review, analysis, and reporting covers information security- and privacyrelated logging performed by organizations, including logging that results from the monitoring of
account usage, remote access, wireless connectivity, mobile device connection, configuration
settings, system component inventory, use of maintenance tools and non-local maintenance,
physical access, temperature and humidity, equipment delivery and removal, communications at
system interfaces, and use of mobile code or Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP). Findings can be
reported to organizational entities that include the incident response team, help desk, and
security or privacy offices. If organizations are prohibited from reviewing and analyzing audit
records or unable to conduct such activities, the review or analysis may be carried out by other
organizations granted such authority. The frequency, scope, and/or depth of the audit record
review, analysis, and reporting may be adjusted to meet organizational needs based on new
information received.
AUDIT RECORD REDUCTION AND REPORT GENERATION
Control: Provide and implement an audit record reduction and report generation capability that:
a. Supports on-demand audit record review, analysis, and reporting requirements and afterthe-fact investigations of incidents; and
b. Does not alter the original content or time ordering of audit records.
Discussion: Audit record reduction is a process that manipulates collected audit log information
and organizes it into a summary format that is more meaningful to analysts. Audit record
reduction and report generation capabilities do not always emanate from the same system or
from the same organizational entities that conduct audit logging activities. The audit record
reduction capability includes modern data mining techniques with advanced data filters to
identify anomalous behavior in audit records. The report generation capability provided by the
system can generate customizable reports. Time ordering of audit records can be an issue if the
granularity of the timestamp in the record is insufficient.
TIME STAMPS
Control:
a. Use internal system clocks to generate time stamps for audit records; and
b. Record time stamps for audit records that meet [Assignment: organization-defined
granularity of time measurement] and that use Coordinated Universal Time, have a fixed
local time offset from Coordinated Universal Time, or that include the local time offset as
part of the time stamp.
Discussion: Time stamps generated by the system include date and time. Time is commonly
expressed in Coordinated Universal Time (UTC), a modern continuation of Greenwich Mean Time
(GMT), or local time with an offset from UTC. Granularity of time measurements refers to the
degree of synchronization between system clocks and reference clocks (e.g., clocks synchronizing
within hundreds of milliseconds or tens of milliseconds). Organizations may define different time
granularities for different system components. Time service can be critical to other security
capabilities such as access control and identification and authentication, depending on the
nature of the mechanisms used to support those capabilities.
PROTECTION OF AUDIT INFORMATION
Control:
a. Protect audit information and audit logging tools from unauthorized access, modification,
and deletion; and
b. Alert [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles] upon detection of unauthorized
access, modification, or deletion of audit information.
Discussion: Audit information includes all information needed to successfully audit system
activity, such as audit records, audit log settings, audit reports, and personally identifiable
information. Audit logging tools are those programs and devices used to conduct system audit
and logging activities. Protection of audit information focuses on technical protection and limits
the ability to access and execute audit logging tools to authorized individuals. Physical protection
of audit information is addressed by both media protection controls and physical and
environmental protection controls.
NON-REPUDIATION
Control: Provide irrefutable evidence that an individual (or process acting on behalf of an
individual) has performed [Assignment: organization-defined actions to be covered by nonrepudiation].
Discussion: Types of individual actions covered by non-repudiation include creating information,
sending and receiving messages, and approving information. Non-repudiation protects against
claims by authors of not having authored certain documents, senders of not having transmitted
messages, receivers of not having received messages, and signatories of not having signed
documents. Non-repudiation services can be used to determine if information originated from an
individual or if an individual took specific actions (e.g., sending an email, signing a contract,
approving a procurement request, or receiving specific information). Organizations obtain nonrepudiation services by employing various techniques or mechanisms, including digital signatures
and digital message receipts.
AUDIT RECORD RETENTION
Control: Retain audit records for [Assignment: organization-defined time period consistent with
records retention policy] to provide support for after-the-fact investigations of incidents and to
meet regulatory and organizational information retention requirements.
Discussion: Organizations retain audit records until it is determined that the records are no
longer needed for administrative, legal, audit, or other operational purposes. This includes the
retention and availability of audit records relative to Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests,
subpoenas, and law enforcement actions. Organizations develop standard categories of audit
records relative to such types of actions and standard response processes for each type of action.
The National Archives and Records Administration (NARA) General Records Schedules provide
federal policy on records retention.
AUDIT RECORD GENERATION
Control:
Provide audit record generation capability for the event types the system is capable of
auditing as defined in AU-2a on [Assignment: organization-defined system components];
b. Allow [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles] to select the event types that
are to be logged by specific components of the system; and
c. Generate audit records for the event types defined in AU-2c that include the audit record
content defined in AU-3.
Discussion: Audit records can be generated from many different system components. The event
types specified in AU-2d are the event types for which audit logs are to be generated and are a
subset of all event types for which the system can generate audit records
MONITORING FOR INFORMATION DISCLOSURE
Control:
a. Monitor [Assignment: organization-defined open-source information and/or information
sites] [Assignment: organization-defined frequency] for evidence of unauthorized disclosure
of organizational information; and
b. If an information disclosure is discovered:
1. Notify [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles]; and
2. Take the following additional actions: [Assignment: organization-defined additional
actions].
Discussion: Unauthorized disclosure of information is a form of data leakage. Open-source
information includes social networking sites and code-sharing platforms and repositories.
Examples of organizational information include personally identifiable information retained by
the organization or proprietary information generated by the organization.
SESSION AUDIT
Control:
a. Provide and implement the capability for [Assignment: organization-defined users or roles]
to [Selection (one or more): record; view; hear; log] the content of a user session under
[Assignment: organization-defined circumstances]; and
b. Develop, integrate, and use session auditing activities in consultation with legal counsel and
in accordance with applicable laws, executive orders, directives, regulations, policies,
standards, and guidelines.
Discussion: Session audits can include monitoring keystrokes, tracking websites visited, and
recording information and/or file transfers. Session audit capability is implemented in addition to
event logging and may involve implementation of specialized session capture technology.
Organizations consider how session auditing can reveal information about individuals that may
give rise to privacy risk as well as how to mitigate those risks. Because session auditing can
impact system and network performance, organizations activate the capability under welldefined situations (e.g., the organization is suspicious of a specific individual). Organizations
consult with legal counsel, civil liberties officials, and privacy officials to ensure that any legal,
privacy, civil rights, or civil liberties issues, including the use of personally identifiable
information, are appropriately addressed.
CROSS-ORGANIZATIONAL AUDIT LOGGING
Control: Employ [Assignment: organization-defined methods] for coordinating [Assignment:
organization-defined audit information] among external organizations when audit information is
transmitted across organizational boundaries.
Discussion: When organizations use systems or services of external organizations, the audit
logging capability necessitates a coordinated, cross-organization approach. For example,
maintaining the identity of individuals who request specific services across organizational
boundaries may often be difficult, and doing so may prove to have significant performance and
privacy ramifications. Therefore, it is often the case that cross-organizational audit logging simply
captures the identity of individuals who issue requests at the initial system, and subsequent
systems record that the requests originated from authorized individuals. Organizations consider
including processes for coordinating audit information requirements and protection of audit
information in information exchange agreements.