PR.PT-2: Removable media is protected and its use restricted according to policy
MEDIA ACCESS
Control: Restrict access to [Assignment: organization-defined types of digital and/or non-digital
media] to [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles].
Discussion: System media includes digital and non-digital media. Digital media includes flash
drives, diskettes, magnetic tapes, external or removable hard disk drives (e.g., solid state,
magnetic), compact discs, and digital versatile discs. Non-digital media includes paper and
microfilm. Denying access to patient medical records in a community hospital unless the
individuals seeking access to such records are authorized healthcare providers is an example of
restricting access to non-digital media. Limiting access to the design specifications stored on
compact discs in the media library to individuals on the system development team is an example
of restricting access to digital media
MEDIA MARKING
Control:
a. Mark system media indicating the distribution limitations, handling caveats, and applicable
security markings (if any) of the information; and
b. Exempt [Assignment: organization-defined types of system media] from marking if the media
remain within [Assignment: organization-defined controlled areas].
Discussion: Security marking refers to the application or use of human-readable security
attributes. Digital media includes diskettes, magnetic tapes, external or removable hard disk
drives (e.g., solid state, magnetic), flash drives, compact discs, and digital versatile discs. Nondigital media includes paper and microfilm. Controlled unclassified information is defined by the
National Archives and Records Administration along with the appropriate safeguarding and
dissemination requirements for such information and is codified in [32 CFR 2002]. Security
markings are generally not required for media that contains information determined by
organizations to be in the public domain or to be publicly releasable. Some organizations may
require markings for public information indicating that the information is publicly releasable.
System media marking reflects applicable laws, executive orders, directives, policies, regulations,
standards, and guidelines.
MEDIA STORAGE
Control:
Physically control and securely store [Assignment: organization-defined types of digital
and/or non-digital media] within [Assignment: organization-defined controlled areas]; and
b. Protect system media types defined in MP-4a until the media are destroyed or sanitized
using approved equipment, techniques, and procedures.
Discussion: System media includes digital and non-digital media. Digital media includes flash
drives, diskettes, magnetic tapes, external or removable hard disk drives (e.g., solid state,
magnetic), compact discs, and digital versatile discs. Non-digital media includes paper and
microfilm. Physically controlling stored media includes conducting inventories, ensuring
procedures are in place to allow individuals to check out and return media to the library, and
maintaining accountability for stored media. Secure storage includes a locked drawer, desk, or
cabinet or a controlled media library. The type of media storage is commensurate with the
security category or classification of the information on the media. Controlled areas are spaces
that provide physical and procedural controls to meet the requirements established for
protecting information and systems. Fewer controls may be needed for media that contains
information determined to be in the public domain, publicly releasable, or have limited adverse
impacts on organizations, operations, or individuals if accessed by other than authorized
personnel. In these situations, physical access controls provide adequate protection.
MEDIA STORAGE | AUTOMATED RESTRICTED ACCESS
Restrict access to media storage areas and log access attempts and access granted using
[Assignment: organization-defined automated mechanisms].
Discussion: Automated mechanisms include keypads, biometric readers, or card readers on
the external entries to media storage areas.
MEDIA TRANSPORT
Control:
a. Protect and control [Assignment: organization-defined types of system media] during
transport outside of controlled areas using [Assignment: organization-defined controls];
b. Maintain accountability for system media during transport outside of controlled areas;
c. Document activities associated with the transport of system media; and
d. Restrict the activities associated with the transport of system media to authorized
personnel.
Discussion: System media includes digital and non-digital media. Digital media includes flash
drives, diskettes, magnetic tapes, external or removable hard disk drives (e.g., solid state and
magnetic), compact discs, and digital versatile discs. Non-digital media includes microfilm and
paper. Controlled areas are spaces for which organizations provide physical or procedural
controls to meet requirements established for protecting information and systems. Controls to
protect media during transport include cryptography and locked containers. Cryptographic
mechanisms can provide confidentiality and integrity protections depending on the mechanisms
implemented. Activities associated with media transport include releasing media for transport,
ensuring that media enters the appropriate transport processes, and the actual transport.
Authorized transport and courier personnel may include individuals external to the organization.
Maintaining accountability of media during transport includes restricting transport activities to
authorized personnel and tracking and/or obtaining records of transport activities as the media
moves through the transportation system to prevent and detect loss, destruction, or tampering.
Organizations establish documentation requirements for activities associated with the transport
of system media in accordance with organizational assessments of risk. Organizations maintain
the flexibility to define record-keeping methods for the different types of media transport as part
of a system of transport-related records.
MEDIA TRANSPORT | CUSTODIANS
Employ an identified custodian during transport of system media outside of controlled
areas.
Discussion: Identified custodians provide organizations with specific points of contact during
the media transport process and facilitate individual accountability. Custodial responsibilities
can be transferred from one individual to another if an unambiguous custodian is identified.
MEDIA USE
Control:
a. [Selection: Restrict; Prohibit] the use of [Assignment: organization-defined types of system
media] on [Assignment: organization-defined systems or system components] using
[Assignment: organization-defined controls]; and
b. Prohibit the use of portable storage devices in organizational systems when such devices
have no identifiable owner.
Discussion: System media includes both digital and non-digital media. Digital media includes
diskettes, magnetic tapes, flash drives, compact discs, digital versatile discs, and removable hard
disk drives. Non-digital media includes paper and microfilm. Media use protections also apply to
mobile devices with information storage capabilities. In contrast to MP-2, which restricts user
access to media, MP-7 restricts the use of certain types of media on systems, for example,
restricting or prohibiting the use of flash drives or external hard disk drives. Organizations use
technical and nontechnical controls to restrict the use of system media. Organizations may
restrict the use of portable storage devices, for example, by using physical cages on workstations
to prohibit access to certain external ports or disabling or removing the ability to insert, read, or
write to such devices. Organizations may also limit the use of portable storage devices to only
approved devices, including devices provided by the organization, devices provided by other
approved organizations, and devices that are not personally owned. Finally, organizations may
restrict the use of portable storage devices based on the type of device, such as by prohibiting
the use of writeable, portable storage devices and implementing this restriction by disabling or
removing the capability to write to such devices. Requiring identifiable owners for storage
devices reduces the risk of using such devices by allowing organizations to assign responsibility
for addressing known vulnerabilities in the devices.
MEDIA USE | PROHIBIT USE OF SANITIZATION-RESISTANT MEDIA
Prohibit the use of sanitization-resistant media in organizational systems.
Discussion: Sanitization resistance refers to how resistant media are to non-destructive
sanitization techniques with respect to the capability to purge information from media.
Certain types of media do not support sanitization commands, or if supported, the interfaces
are not supported in a standardized way across these devices. Sanitization-resistant media
includes compact flash, embedded flash on boards and devices, solid state drives, and USB
removable media.
MEDIA DOWNGRADING
Control:
a. Establish [Assignment: organization-defined system media downgrading process] that
includes employing downgrading mechanisms with strength and integrity commensurate
with the security category or classification of the information;
b. Verify that the system media downgrading process is commensurate with the security
category and/or classification level of the information to be removed and the access
authorizations of the potential recipients of the downgraded information;
c. Identify [Assignment: organization-defined system media requiring downgrading]; and
d. Downgrade the identified system media using the established process.
Discussion: Media downgrading applies to digital and non-digital media subject to release
outside of the organization, whether the media is considered removable or not. When applied to
system media, the downgrading process removes information from the media, typically by
security category or classification level, such that the information cannot be retrieved or
reconstructed. Downgrading of media includes redacting information to enable wider release
and distribution. Downgrading ensures that empty space on the media is devoid of information.
MEDIA DOWNGRADING | DOCUMENTATION OF PROCESS
Document system media downgrading actions.
Discussion: Organizations can document the media downgrading process by providing
information, such as the downgrading technique employed, the identification number of the
downgraded media, and the identity of the individual that authorized and/or performed the
downgrading action.
MEDIA DOWNGRADING | EQUIPMENT TESTING
Test downgrading equipment and procedures [Assignment: organization-defined
frequency] to ensure that downgrading actions are being achieved.
MEDIA DOWNGRADING | CONTROLLED UNCLASSIFIED INFORMATION
Downgrade system media containing controlled unclassified information prior to public
release.
Discussion: The downgrading of controlled unclassified information uses approved
sanitization tools, techniques, and procedures.
MEDIA DOWNGRADING | CLASSIFIED INFORMATION
Downgrade system media containing classified information prior to release to individuals
without required access authorizations.
Discussion: Downgrading of classified information uses approved sanitization tools,
techniques, and procedures to transfer information confirmed to be unclassified from
classified systems to unclassified media.