PR.PT-4: Communications and control networks are protected
INFORMATION FLOW ENFORCEMENT
Control: Enforce approved authorizations for controlling the flow of information within the
system and between connected systems based on [Assignment: organization-defined
information flow control policies].
Discussion: Information flow control regulates where information can travel within a system and
between systems (in contrast to who is allowed to access the information) and without regard to
subsequent accesses to that information. Flow control restrictions include blocking external
traffic that claims to be from within the organization, keeping export-controlled information
from being transmitted in the clear to the Internet, restricting web requests that are not from
the internal web proxy server, and limiting information transfers between organizations based
on data structures and content. Transferring information between organizations may require an
agreement specifying how the information flow is enforced (see CA-3). Transferring information
between systems in different security or privacy domains with different security or privacy
policies introduces the risk that such transfers violate one or more domain security or privacy
policies. In such situations, information owners/stewards provide guidance at designated policy
enforcement points between connected systems. Organizations consider mandating specific
architectural solutions to enforce specific security and privacy policies. Enforcement includes
prohibiting information transfers between connected systems (i.e., allowing access only),
verifying write permissions before accepting information from another security or privacy
domain or connected system, employing hardware mechanisms to enforce one-way information
flows, and implementing trustworthy regrading mechanisms to reassign security or privacy
attributes and labels.
Organizations commonly employ information flow control policies and enforcement mechanisms
to control the flow of information between designated sources and destinations within systems
and between connected systems. Flow control is based on the characteristics of the information
and/or the information path. Enforcement occurs, for example, in boundary protection devices
that employ rule sets or establish configuration settings that restrict system services, provide a
packet-filtering capability based on header information, or provide a message-filtering capability
based on message content. Organizations also consider the trustworthiness of filtering and/or
inspection mechanisms (i.e., hardware, firmware, and software components) that are critical to
information flow enforcement. Control enhancements 3 through 32 primarily address crossdomain solution needs that focus on more advanced filtering techniques, in-depth analysis, and
stronger flow enforcement mechanisms implemented in cross-domain products, such as highassurance guards. Such capabilities are generally not available in commercial off-the-shelf
products. Information flow enforcement also applies to control plane traffic (e.g., routing and
DNS)
REMOTE ACCESS
Control:
a. Establish and document usage restrictions, configuration/connection requirements, and
implementation guidance for each type of remote access allowed; and
b. Authorize each type of remote access to the system prior to allowing such connections.
Discussion: Remote access is access to organizational systems (or processes acting on behalf of
users) that communicate through external networks such as the Internet. Types of remote access
include dial-up, broadband, and wireless. Organizations use encrypted virtual private networks
(VPNs) to enhance confidentiality and integrity for remote connections. The use of encrypted
VPNs provides sufficient assurance to the organization that it can effectively treat such
connections as internal networks if the cryptographic mechanisms used are implemented in
accordance with applicable laws, executive orders, directives, regulations, policies, standards,
and guidelines. Still, VPN connections traverse external networks, and the encrypted VPN does
not enhance the availability of remote connections. VPNs with encrypted tunnels can also affect
the ability to adequately monitor network communications traffic for malicious code. Remote
access controls apply to systems other than public web servers or systems designed for public
access. Authorization of each remote access type addresses authorization prior to allowing
remote access without specifying the specific formats for such authorization. While organizations
may use information exchange and system connection security agreements to manage remote
access connections to other systems, such agreements are addressed as part of CA-3. Enforcing
access restrictions for remote access is addressed via AC-3.
Control:
a. Establish configuration requirements, connection requirements, and implementation
guidance for each type of wireless access; and
b. Authorize each type of wireless access to the system prior to allowing such connections.
Discussion: Wireless technologies include microwave, packet radio (ultra-high frequency or very
high frequency), 802.11x, and Bluetooth. Wireless networks use authentication protocols that
provide authenticator protection and mutual authentication
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES
Control: Establish alternate telecommunications services, including necessary agreements to
permit the resumption of [Assignment: organization-defined system operations] for essential
mission and business functions within [Assignment: organization-defined time period] when the
primary telecommunications capabilities are unavailable at either the primary or alternate
processing or storage sites.
Discussion: Telecommunications services (for data and voice) for primary and alternate
processing and storage sites are in scope for CP-8. Alternate telecommunications services reflect
the continuity requirements in contingency plans to maintain essential mission and business
functions despite the loss of primary telecommunications services. Organizations may specify
different time periods for primary or alternate sites. Alternate telecommunications services
include additional organizational or commercial ground-based circuits or lines, network-based
approaches to telecommunications, or the use of satellites. Organizations consider factors such
as availability, quality of service, and access when entering into alternate telecommunications
agreements.
BOUNDARY PROTECTION
Control:
a. Monitor and control communications at the external managed interfaces to the system and
at key internal managed interfaces within the system;
b. Implement subnetworks for publicly accessible system components that are [Selection:
physically; logically] separated from internal organizational networks; and
c. Connect to external networks or systems only through managed interfaces consisting of
boundary protection devices arranged in accordance with an organizational security and
privacy architecture.
Discussion: Managed interfaces include gateways, routers, firewalls, guards, network-based
malicious code analysis, virtualization systems, or encrypted tunnels implemented within a
security architecture. Subnetworks that are physically or logically separated from internal
networks are referred to as demilitarized zones or DMZs. Restricting or prohibiting interfaces
within organizational systems includes restricting external web traffic to designated web servers
within managed interfaces, prohibiting external traffic that appears to be spoofing internal
addresses, and prohibiting internal traffic that appears to be spoofing external addresses. [SP
800-189] provides additional information on source address validation techniques to prevent
ingress and egress of traffic with spoofed addresses. Commercial telecommunications services
are provided by network components and consolidated management systems shared by
customers. These services may also include third party-provided access lines and other service
elements. Such services may represent sources of increased risk despite contract security
provisions. Boundary protection may be implemented as a common control for all or part of an
organizational network such that the boundary to be protected is greater than a system-specific
boundary (i.e., an authorization boundary).
SECURE NAME/ADDRESS RESOLUTION SERVICE (AUTHORITATIVE SOURCE)
Control:
a. Provide additional data origin authentication and integrity verification artifacts along with
the authoritative name resolution data the system returns in response to external
name/address resolution queries; and
b. Provide the means to indicate the security status of child zones and (if the child supports
secure resolution services) to enable verification of a chain of trust among parent and child
domains, when operating as part of a distributed, hierarchical namespace.
Discussion: Providing authoritative source information enables external clients, including remote
Internet clients, to obtain origin authentication and integrity verification assurances for the
host/service name to network address resolution information obtained through the service.
Systems that provide name and address resolution services include domain name system (DNS)
servers. Additional artifacts include DNS Security Extensions (DNSSEC) digital signatures and
cryptographic keys. Authoritative data includes DNS resource records. The means for indicating
the security status of child zones include the use of delegation signer resource records in the
DNS. Systems that use technologies other than the DNS to map between host and service names
and network addresses provide other means to assure the authenticity and integrity of response
data
SECURE NAME/ADDRESS RESOLUTION SERVICE (RECURSIVE OR CACHING RESOLVER)
Control: Request and perform data origin authentication and data integrity verification on the
name/address resolution responses the system receives from authoritative sources.
Discussion: Each client of name resolution services either performs this validation on its own or
has authenticated channels to trusted validation providers. Systems that provide name and
address resolution services for local clients include recursive resolving or caching domain name
system (DNS) servers. DNS client resolvers either perform validation of DNSSEC signatures, or
clients use authenticated channels to recursive resolvers that perform such validations. Systems
that use technologies other than the DNS to map between host and service names and network
addresses provide some other means to enable clients to verify the authenticity and integrity of
response data.
ARCHITECTURE AND PROVISIONING FOR NAME/ADDRESS RESOLUTION SERVICE
Control: Ensure the systems that collectively provide name/address resolution service for an
organization are fault-tolerant and implement internal and external role separation.
Discussion: Systems that provide name and address resolution services include domain name
system (DNS) servers. To eliminate single points of failure in systems and enhance redundancy,
organizations employ at least two authoritative domain name system servers—one configured as
the primary server and the other configured as the secondary server. Additionally, organizations
typically deploy the servers in two geographically separated network subnetworks (i.e., not
located in the same physical facility). For role separation, DNS servers with internal roles only
process name and address resolution requests from within organizations (i.e., from internal
clients). DNS servers with external roles only process name and address resolution information
requests from clients external to organizations (i.e., on external networks, including the
Internet). Organizations specify clients that can access authoritative DNS servers in certain roles
(e.g., by address ranges and explicit lists).
SESSION AUTHENTICITY
Control: Protect the authenticity of communications sessions.
Discussion: Protecting session authenticity addresses communications protection at the session
level, not at the packet level. Such protection establishes grounds for confidence at both ends of
communications sessions in the ongoing identities of other parties and the validity of transmitted
information. Authenticity protection includes protecting against “man-in-the-middle” attacks,
session hijacking, and the insertion of false information into sessions
FAIL IN KNOWN STATE
Control: Fail to a [Assignment: organization-defined known system state] for the following
failures on the indicated components while preserving [Assignment: organization-defined system
state information] in failure: [Assignment: list of organization-defined types of system failures on
organization-defined system components].
Discussion: Failure in a known state addresses security concerns in accordance with the mission
and business needs of organizations. Failure in a known state prevents the loss of confidentiality,
integrity, or availability of information in the event of failures of organizational systems or system
components. Failure in a known safe state helps to prevent systems from failing to a state that
may cause injury to individuals or destruction to property. Preserving system state information
facilitates system restart and return to the operational mode with less disruption of mission and
business processes.
THIN NODES
Control: Employ minimal functionality and information storage on the following system
components: [Assignment: organization-defined system components].
Discussion: The deployment of system components with minimal functionality reduces the need
to secure every endpoint and may reduce the exposure of information, systems, and services to
attacks. Reduced or minimal functionality includes diskless nodes and thin client technologies
HETEROGENEITY
Control: Employ a diverse set of information technologies for the following system components
in the implementation of the system: [Assignment: organization-defined system components].
Discussion: Increasing the diversity of information technologies within organizational systems
reduces the impact of potential exploitations or compromises of specific technologies. Such
diversity protects against common mode failures, including those failures induced by supply
chain attacks. Diversity in information technologies also reduces the likelihood that the means
adversaries use to compromise one system component will be effective against other system
components, thus further increasing the adversary work factor to successfully complete planned
attacks. An increase in diversity may add complexity and management overhead that could
ultimately lead to mistakes and unauthorized configurations
SYSTEM PARTITIONING
Control: Partition the system into [Assignment: organization-defined system components]
residing in separate [Selection: physical; logical] domains or environments based on [Assignment:
organization-defined circumstances for physical or logical separation of components].
Discussion: System partitioning is part of a defense-in-depth protection strategy. Organizations
determine the degree of physical separation of system components. Physical separation options
include physically distinct components in separate racks in the same room, critical components in
separate rooms, and geographical separation of critical components. Security categorization can
guide the selection of candidates for domain partitioning. Managed interfaces restrict or prohibit
network access and information flow among partitioned system components
DISTRIBUTED PROCESSING AND STORAGE
Control: Distribute the following processing and storage components across multiple [Selection:
physical locations; logical domains]: [Assignment: organization-defined processing and storage
components].
Discussion: Distributing processing and storage across multiple physical locations or logical
domains provides a degree of redundancy or overlap for organizations. The redundancy and
overlap increase the work factor of adversaries to adversely impact organizational operations,
assets, and individuals. The use of distributed processing and storage does not assume a single
primary processing or storage location. Therefore, it allows for parallel processing and storage.
OUT-OF-BAND CHANNELS
Control: Employ the following out-of-band channels for the physical delivery or electronic
transmission of [Assignment: organization-defined information, system components, or devices]
to [Assignment: organization-defined individuals or systems]: [Assignment: organization-defined
out-of-band channels].
Discussion: Out-of-band channels include local, non-network accesses to systems; network paths
physically separate from network paths used for operational traffic; or non-electronic paths, such
as the U.S. Postal Service. The use of out-of-band channels is contrasted with the use of in-band
channels (i.e., the same channels) that carry routine operational traffic. Out-of-band channels do
not have the same vulnerability or exposure as in-band channels. Therefore, the confidentiality,
integrity, or availability compromises of in-band channels will not compromise or adversely affect
the out-of-band channels. Organizations may employ out-of-band channels in the delivery or
transmission of organizational items, including authenticators and credentials; cryptographic key
management information; system and data backups; configuration management changes for
hardware, firmware, or software; security updates; maintenance information; and malicious
code protection updates.
OPERATIONS SECURITY
Control: Employ the following operations security controls to protect key organizational
information throughout the system development life cycle: [Assignment: organization-defined
operations security controls].
Discussion: Operations security (OPSEC) is a systematic process by which potential adversaries
can be denied information about the capabilities and intentions of organizations by identifying,
controlling, and protecting generally unclassified information that specifically relates to the
planning and execution of sensitive organizational activities. The OPSEC process involves five
steps: identification of critical information, analysis of threats, analysis of vulnerabilities,
assessment of risks, and the application of appropriate countermeasures. OPSEC controls are
applied to organizational systems and the environments in which those systems operate. OPSEC
controls protect the confidentiality of information, including limiting the sharing of information
with suppliers, potential suppliers, and other non-organizational elements and individuals.
Information critical to organizational mission and business functions includes user identities,
element uses, suppliers, supply chain processes, functional requirements, security requirements,
system design specifications, testing and evaluation protocols, and security control
implementation details.
PROCESS ISOLATION
Control: Maintain a separate execution domain for each executing system process.
Discussion: Systems can maintain separate execution domains for each executing process by
assigning each process a separate address space. Each system process has a distinct address
space so that communication between processes is performed in a manner controlled through
the security functions, and one process cannot modify the executing code of another process.
Maintaining separate execution domains for executing processes can be achieved, for example,
by implementing separate address spaces. Process isolation technologies, including sandboxing
or virtualization, logically separate software and firmware from other software, firmware, and
data. Process isolation helps limit the access of potentially untrusted software to other system
resources. The capability to maintain separate execution domains is available in commercial
operating systems that employ multi-state processor technologies
WIRELESS LINK PROTECTION
Control: Protect external and internal [Assignment: organization-defined wireless links] from the
following signal parameter attacks: [Assignment: organization-defined types of signal parameter
attacks or references to sources for such attacks].
Discussion: Wireless link protection applies to internal and external wireless communication
links that may be visible to individuals who are not authorized system users. Adversaries can
exploit the signal parameters of wireless links if such links are not adequately protected. There
are many ways to exploit the signal parameters of wireless links to gain intelligence, deny service,
or spoof system users. Protection of wireless links reduces the impact of attacks that are unique
to wireless systems. If organizations rely on commercial service providers for transmission
services as commodity items rather than as fully dedicated services, it may not be possible to
implement wireless link protections to the extent necessary to meet organizational security
requirements.
PORT AND I/O DEVICE ACCESS
Control: [Selection: Physically; Logically] disable or remove [Assignment: organization-defined
connection ports or input/output devices] on the following systems or system components:
[Assignment: organization-defined systems or system components].
Discussion: Connection ports include Universal Serial Bus (USB), Thunderbolt, and Firewire (IEEE
1394). Input/output (I/O) devices include compact disc and digital versatile disc drives. Disabling
or removing such connection ports and I/O devices helps prevent the exfiltration of information
from systems and the introduction of malicious code from those ports or devices. Physically
disabling or removing ports and/or devices is the stronger action.
USAGE RESTRICTIONS
Control:
a. Establish usage restrictions and implementation guidelines for the following system
components: [Assignment: organization-defined system components]; and
b. Authorize, monitor, and control the use of such components within the system.
Discussion: Usage restrictions apply to all system components including but not limited to
mobile code, mobile devices, wireless access, and wired and wireless peripheral components
(e.g., copiers, printers, scanners, optical devices, and other similar technologies). The usage
restrictions and implementation guidelines are based on the potential for system components to
cause damage to the system and help to ensure that only authorized system use occurs.