PR.PT-5: Mechanisms (e.g., failsafe, load balancing, hot swap) are implemented to achieve resilience requirements in normal and adverse situations
ALTERNATE PROCESSING SITE
Control:
a. Establish an alternate processing site, including necessary agreements to permit the transfer
and resumption of [Assignment: organization-defined system operations] for essential
mission and business functions within [Assignment: organization-defined time period
consistent with recovery time and recovery point objectives] when the primary processing
capabilities are unavailable;
b. Make available at the alternate processing site, the equipment and supplies required to
transfer and resume operations or put contracts in place to support delivery to the site
within the organization-defined time period for transfer and resumption; and
c. Provide controls at the alternate processing site that are equivalent to those at the primary
site.
Discussion: Alternate processing sites are geographically distinct from primary processing sites
and provide processing capability if the primary processing site is not available. The alternate
processing capability may be addressed using a physical processing site or other alternatives,
such as failover to a cloud-based service provider or other internally or externally provided
processing service. Geographically distributed architectures that support contingency
requirements may also be considered alternate processing sites. Controls that are covered by
alternate processing site agreements include the environmental conditions at alternate sites,
access rules, physical and environmental protection requirements, and the coordination for the
transfer and assignment of personnel. Requirements are allocated to alternate processing sites
that reflect the requirements in contingency plans to maintain essential mission and business
functions despite disruption, compromise, or failure in organizational systems.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES
Control: Establish alternate telecommunications services, including necessary agreements to
permit the resumption of [Assignment: organization-defined system operations] for essential
mission and business functions within [Assignment: organization-defined time period] when the
primary telecommunications capabilities are unavailable at either the primary or alternate
processing or storage sites.
Discussion: Telecommunications services (for data and voice) for primary and alternate
processing and storage sites are in scope for CP-8. Alternate telecommunications services reflect
the continuity requirements in contingency plans to maintain essential mission and business
functions despite the loss of primary telecommunications services. Organizations may specify
different time periods for primary or alternate sites. Alternate telecommunications services
include additional organizational or commercial ground-based circuits or lines, network-based
approaches to telecommunications, or the use of satellites. Organizations consider factors such
as availability, quality of service, and access when entering into alternate telecommunications
agreements.
ALTERNATE COMMUNICATIONS PROTOCOLS
Control: Provide the capability to employ [Assignment: organization-defined alternative
communications protocols] in support of maintaining continuity of operations.
Discussion: Contingency plans and the contingency training or testing associated with those
plans incorporate an alternate communications protocol capability as part of establishing
resilience in organizational systems. Switching communications protocols may affect software
applications and operational aspects of systems. Organizations assess the potential side effects
of introducing alternate communications protocols prior to implementation
ALTERNATIVE SECURITY MECHANISMS
Control: Employ [Assignment: organization-defined alternative or supplemental security
mechanisms] for satisfying [Assignment: organization-defined security functions] when the
primary means of implementing the security function is unavailable or compromised.
Discussion: Use of alternative security mechanisms supports system resiliency, contingency
planning, and continuity of operations. To ensure mission and business continuity, organizations
can implement alternative or supplemental security mechanisms. The mechanisms may be less
effective than the primary mechanisms. However, having the capability to readily employ
alternative or supplemental mechanisms enhances mission and business continuity that might
otherwise be adversely impacted if operations had to be curtailed until the primary means of
implementing the functions was restored. Given the cost and level of effort required to provide
such alternative capabilities, the alternative or supplemental mechanisms are only applied to
critical security capabilities provided by systems, system components, or system services. For
example, an organization may issue one-time pads to senior executives, officials, and system
administrators if multi-factor tokens—the standard means for achieving secure authentication—
are compromised.
SECURITY AND PRIVACY ARCHITECTURES
Control:
a. Develop security and privacy architectures for the system that:
1. Describe the requirements and approach to be taken for protecting the confidentiality,
integrity, and availability of organizational information;
2. Describe the requirements and approach to be taken for processing personally
identifiable information to minimize privacy risk to individuals;
3. Describe how the architectures are integrated into and support the enterprise
architecture; and
4. Describe any assumptions about, and dependencies on, external systems and services;
b. Review and update the architectures [Assignment: organization-defined frequency] to reflect
changes in the enterprise architecture; and
c. Reflect planned architecture changes in security and privacy plans, Concept of Operations
(CONOPS), criticality analysis, organizational procedures, and procurements and acquisitions.
Discussion: The security and privacy architectures at the system level are consistent with the
organization-wide security and privacy architectures described in PM-7, which are integral to and
developed as part of the enterprise architecture. The architectures include an architectural
description, the allocation of security and privacy functionality (including controls), security- and
privacy-related information for external interfaces, information being exchanged across the
interfaces, and the protection mechanisms associated with each interface. The architectures can
also include other information, such as user roles and the access privileges assigned to each role;
security and privacy requirements; types of information processed, stored, and transmitted by
the system; supply chain risk management requirements; restoration priorities of information
and system services; and other protection needs.
[SP 800-160-1] provides guidance on the use of security architectures as part of the system
development life cycle process. [OMB M-19-03] requires the use of the systems security
engineering concepts described in [SP 800-160-1] for high value assets. Security and privacy
architectures are reviewed and updated throughout the system development life cycle, from
analysis of alternatives through review of the proposed architecture in the RFP responses to the
design reviews before and during implementation (e.g., during preliminary design reviews and
critical design reviews).
In today’s modern computing architectures, it is becoming less common for organizations to
control all information resources. There may be key dependencies on external information
services and service providers. Describing such dependencies in the security and privacy
architectures is necessary for developing a comprehensive mission and business protection
strategy. Establishing, developing, documenting, and maintaining under configuration control a
baseline configuration for organizational systems is critical to implementing and maintaining
effective architectures. The development of the architectures is coordinated with the senior
agency information security officer and the senior agency official for privacy to ensure that the
controls needed to support security and privacy requirements are identified and effectively
implemented. In many circumstances, there may be no distinction between the security and
privacy architecture for a system. In other circumstances, security objectives may be adequately
satisfied, but privacy objectives may only be partially satisfied by the security requirements. In
these cases, consideration of the privacy requirements needed to achieve satisfaction will result
in a distinct privacy architecture. The documentation, however, may simply reflect the combined
architectures.
PL-8 is primarily directed at organizations to ensure that architectures are developed for the
system and, moreover, that the architectures are integrated with or tightly coupled to the
enterprise architecture. In contrast, SA-17 is primarily directed at the external information
technology product and system developers and integrators. SA-17, which is complementary to
PL-8, is selected when organizations outsource the development of systems or components to
external entities and when there is a need to demonstrate consistency with the organization’s
enterprise architecture and security and privacy architectures.
RESOURCE AVAILABILITY
Control: Protect the availability of resources by allocating [Assignment: organization-defined
resources] by [Selection (one or more): priority; quota; [Assignment: organization-defined
controls]].
Discussion: Priority protection prevents lower-priority processes from delaying or interfering
with the system that services higher-priority processes. Quotas prevent users or processes from
obtaining more than predetermined amounts of resources.