ID.RM-3: The organization’s determination of risk tolerance is informed by its role in critical infrastructure and sector specific risk analysis
CRITICALITY ANALYSIS
Control: Identify critical system components and functions by performing a criticality analysis for
[Assignment: organization-defined systems, system components, or system services] at
[Assignment: organization-defined decision points in the system development life cycle].
Discussion: Not all system components, functions, or services necessarily require significant
protections. For example, criticality analysis is a key tenet of supply chain risk management and
informs the prioritization of protection activities. The identification of critical system components
and functions considers applicable laws, executive orders, regulations, directives, policies,
standards, system functionality requirements, system and component interfaces, and system and
component dependencies. Systems engineers conduct a functional decomposition of a system to
identify mission-critical functions and components. The functional decomposition includes the
identification of organizational missions supported by the system, decomposition into the
specific functions to perform those missions, and traceability to the hardware, software, and
firmware components that implement those functions, including when the functions are shared
by many components within and external to the system.
The operational environment of a system or a system component may impact the criticality,
including the connections to and dependencies on cyber-physical systems, devices, system-ofsystems, and outsourced IT services. System components that allow unmediated access to critical
system components or functions are considered critical due to the inherent vulnerabilities that
such components create. Component and function criticality are assessed in terms of the impact
of a component or function failure on the organizational missions that are supported by the
system that contains the components and functions.
Criticality analysis is performed when an architecture or design is being developed, modified, or
upgraded. If such analysis is performed early in the system development life cycle, organizations
may be able to modify the system design to reduce the critical nature of these components and
functions, such as by adding redundancy or alternate paths into the system design. Criticality
analysis can also influence the protection measures required by development contractors. In
addition to criticality analysis for systems, system components, and system services, criticality
analysis of information is an important consideration. Such analysis is conducted as part of
security categorization in RA-2.
CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE PLAN
Control: Address information security and privacy issues in the development, documentation,
and updating of a critical infrastructure and key resources protection plan.
Discussion: Protection strategies are based on the prioritization of critical assets and resources.
The requirement and guidance for defining critical infrastructure and key resources and for
preparing an associated critical infrastructure protection plan are found in applicable laws,
executive orders, directives, policies, regulations, standards, and guidelines.
RISK MANAGEMENT STRATEGY
Control:
a. Develops a comprehensive strategy to manage:
1. Security risk to organizational operations and assets, individuals, other organizations,
and the Nation associated with the operation and use of organizational systems; and
2. Privacy risk to individuals resulting from the authorized processing of personally
identifiable information;
b. Implement the risk management strategy consistently across the organization; and
c. Review and update the risk management strategy [Assignment: organization-defined
frequency] or as required, to address organizational changes.
NIST SP 800-53, REV. 5 SECURITY AND PRIVACY CONTROLS FOR INFORMATION SYSTEMS AND ORGANIZATIONS
CHAPTER THREE PAGE 208
This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-53r5
Discussion: An organization-wide risk management strategy includes an expression of the
security and privacy risk tolerance for the organization, security and privacy risk mitigation
strategies, acceptable risk assessment methodologies, a process for evaluating security and
privacy risk across the organization with respect to the organization’s risk tolerance, and
approaches for monitoring risk over time. The senior accountable official for risk management
(agency head or designated official) aligns information security management processes with
strategic, operational, and budgetary planning processes. The risk executive function, led by the
senior accountable official for risk management, can facilitate consistent application of the risk
management strategy organization-wide. The risk management strategy can be informed by
security and privacy risk-related inputs from other sources, both internal and external to the
organization, to ensure that the strategy is broad-based and comprehensive. The supply chain
risk management strategy described in PM-30 can also provide useful inputs to the organizationwide risk management strategy.
MISSION AND BUSINESS PROCESS DEFINITION
Control:
a. Define organizational mission and business processes with consideration for information
security and privacy and the resulting risk to organizational operations, organizational assets,
individuals, other organizations, and the Nation; and
b. Determine information protection and personally identifiable information processing needs
arising from the defined mission and business processes; and
NIST SP 800-53, REV. 5 SECURITY AND PRIVACY CONTROLS FOR INFORMATION SYSTEMS AND ORGANIZATIONS
CHAPTER THREE PAGE 209
This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-53r5
c. Review and revise the mission and business processes [Assignment: organization-defined
frequency].
Discussion: Protection needs are technology-independent capabilities that are required to
counter threats to organizations, individuals, systems, and the Nation through the compromise
of information (i.e., loss of confidentiality, integrity, availability, or privacy). Information
protection and personally identifiable information processing needs are derived from the mission
and business needs defined by organizational stakeholders, the mission and business processes
designed to meet those needs, and the organizational risk management strategy. Information
protection and personally identifiable information processing needs determine the required
controls for the organization and the systems. Inherent to defining protection and personally
identifiable information processing needs is an understanding of the adverse impact that could
result if a compromise or breach of information occurs. The categorization process is used to
make such potential impact determinations. Privacy risks to individuals can arise from the
compromise of personally identifiable information, but they can also arise as unintended
consequences or a byproduct of the processing of personally identifiable information at any
stage of the information life cycle. Privacy risk assessments are used to prioritize the risks that
are created for individuals from system processing of personally identifiable information. These
risk assessments enable the selection of the required privacy controls for the organization and
systems. Mission and business process definitions and the associated protection requirements
are documented in accordance with organizational policies and procedures.