DE.AE-4: Impact of events is determined
CONTINGENCY PLAN
Control:
a. Develop a contingency plan for the system that:
1. Identifies essential mission and business functions and associated contingency
requirements;
2. Provides recovery objectives, restoration priorities, and metrics;
3. Addresses contingency roles, responsibilities, assigned individuals with contact
information;
4. Addresses maintaining essential mission and business functions despite a system
disruption, compromise, or failure;
5. Addresses eventual, full system restoration without deterioration of the controls
originally planned and implemented;
6. Addresses the sharing of contingency information; and
7. Is reviewed and approved by [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles];
b. Distribute copies of the contingency plan to [Assignment: organization-defined key
contingency personnel (identified by name and/or by role) and organizational elements];
c. Coordinate contingency planning activities with incident handling activities;
d. Review the contingency plan for the system [Assignment: organization-defined frequency];
e. Update the contingency plan to address changes to the organization, system, or
environment of operation and problems encountered during contingency plan
implementation, execution, or testing;
f. Communicate contingency plan changes to [Assignment: organization-defined key
contingency personnel (identified by name and/or by role) and organizational elements];
g. Incorporate lessons learned from contingency plan testing, training, or actual contingency
activities into contingency testing and training; and
h. Protect the contingency plan from unauthorized disclosure and modification.
Discussion: Contingency planning for systems is part of an overall program for achieving
continuity of operations for organizational mission and business functions. Contingency planning
addresses system restoration and implementation of alternative mission or business processes
when systems are compromised or breached. Contingency planning is considered throughout the
system development life cycle and is a fundamental part of the system design. Systems can be
designed for redundancy, to provide backup capabilities, and for resilience. Contingency plans
reflect the degree of restoration required for organizational systems since not all systems need
to fully recover to achieve the level of continuity of operations desired. System recovery
objectives reflect applicable laws, executive orders, directives, regulations, policies, standards,
guidelines, organizational risk tolerance, and system impact level.
Actions addressed in contingency plans include orderly system degradation, system shutdown,
fallback to a manual mode, alternate information flows, and operating in modes reserved for
when systems are under attack. By coordinating contingency planning with incident handling
activities, organizations ensure that the necessary planning activities are in place and activated in
the event of an incident. Organizations consider whether continuity of operations during an
incident conflicts with the capability to automatically disable the system, as specified in IR-4(5).
Incident response planning is part of contingency planning for organizations and is addressed in
the IR (Incident Response) family.
CONTINGENCY PLAN | COORDINATE WITH RELATED PLANS
Coordinate contingency plan development with organizational elements responsible for
related plans.
Discussion: Plans that are related to contingency plans include Business Continuity Plans,
Disaster Recovery Plans, Critical Infrastructure Plans, Continuity of Operations Plans, Crisis
Communications Plans, Insider Threat Implementation Plans, Data Breach Response Plans,
Cyber Incident Response Plans, Breach Response Plans, and Occupant Emergency Plans.
CONTINGENCY PLAN | CAPACITY PLANNING
Conduct capacity planning so that necessary capacity for information processing,
telecommunications, and environmental support exists during contingency operations.
Discussion: Capacity planning is needed because different threats can result in a reduction
of the available processing, telecommunications, and support services intended to support
essential mission and business functions. Organizations anticipate degraded operations
during contingency operations and factor the degradation into capacity planning. For
capacity planning, environmental support refers to any environmental factor for which the
organization determines that it needs to provide support in a contingency situation, even if
in a degraded state. Such determinations are based on an organizational assessment of risk,
system categorization (impact level), and organizational risk tolerance.
CONTINGENCY PLAN | RESUME MISSION AND BUSINESS FUNCTIONS
Plan for the resumption of [Selection: all; essential] mission and business functions within
[Assignment: organization-defined time period] of contingency plan activation.
Discussion: Organizations may choose to conduct contingency planning activities to resume
mission and business functions as part of business continuity planning or as part of business
impact analyses. Organizations prioritize the resumption of mission and business functions.
The time period for resuming mission and business functions may be dependent on the
severity and extent of the disruptions to the system and its supporting infrastructure.
CONTINGENCY PLAN | CONTINUE MISSION AND BUSINESS FUNCTIONS
Plan for the continuance of [Selection: all; essential] mission and business functions with
minimal or no loss of operational continuity and sustains that continuity until full system
restoration at primary processing and/or storage sites.
Discussion: Organizations may choose to conduct the contingency planning activities to
continue mission and business functions as part of business continuity planning or business
impact analyses. Primary processing and/or storage sites defined by organizations as part of
contingency planning may change depending on the circumstances associated with the
contingency.
CONTINGENCY PLAN | ALTERNATE PROCESSING AND STORAGE SITES
Plan for the transfer of [Selection: all; essential] mission and business functions to
alternate processing and/or storage sites with minimal or no loss of operational continuity
and sustain that continuity through system restoration to primary processing and/or
storage sites.
Discussion: Organizations may choose to conduct contingency planning activities for
alternate processing and storage sites as part of business continuity planning or business
impact analyses. Primary processing and/or storage sites defined by organizations as part of
contingency planning may change depending on the circumstances associated with the
contingency.
CONTINGENCY PLAN | COORDINATE WITH EXTERNAL SERVICE PROVIDERS
Coordinate the contingency plan with the contingency plans of external service providers
to ensure that contingency requirements can be satisfied.
Discussion: When the capability of an organization to carry out its mission and business
functions is dependent on external service providers, developing a comprehensive and
timely contingency plan may become more challenging. When mission and business
functions are dependent on external service providers, organizations coordinate contingency
planning activities with the external entities to ensure that the individual plans reflect the
overall contingency needs of the organization.
CONTINGENCY PLAN | IDENTIFY CRITICAL ASSETS
Identify critical system assets supporting [Selection: all; essential] mission and business
functions.
Discussion: Organizations may choose to identify critical assets as part of criticality analysis,
business continuity planning, or business impact analyses. Organizations identify critical
system assets so that additional controls can be employed (beyond the controls routinely
implemented) to help ensure that organizational mission and business functions can
continue to be conducted during contingency operations. The identification of critical
information assets also facilitates the prioritization of organizational resources. Critical
system assets include technical and operational aspects. Technical aspects include system
components, information technology services, information technology products, and
mechanisms. Operational aspects include procedures (i.e., manually executed operations)
and personnel (i.e., individuals operating technical controls and/or executing manual
procedures). Organizational program protection plans can assist in identifying critical assets.
If critical assets are resident within or supported by external service providers, organizations
consider implementing CP-2(7) as a control enhancement.
INCIDENT HANDLING
Control:
a. Implement an incident handling capability for incidents that is consistent with the incident
response plan and includes preparation, detection and analysis, containment, eradication,
and recovery;
b. Coordinate incident handling activities with contingency planning activities;
c. Incorporate lessons learned from ongoing incident handling activities into incident response
procedures, training, and testing, and implement the resulting changes accordingly; and
d. Ensure the rigor, intensity, scope, and results of incident handling activities are comparable
and predictable across the organization.
Discussion: Organizations recognize that incident response capabilities are dependent on the
capabilities of organizational systems and the mission and business processes being supported by
those systems. Organizations consider incident response as part of the definition, design, and
development of mission and business processes and systems. Incident-related information can
be obtained from a variety of sources, including audit monitoring, physical access monitoring,
and network monitoring; user or administrator reports; and reported supply chain events. An
effective incident handling capability includes coordination among many organizational entities
(e.g., mission or business owners, system owners, authorizing officials, human resources offices,
physical security offices, personnel security offices, legal departments, risk executive [function],
operations personnel, procurement offices). Suspected security incidents include the receipt of
suspicious email communications that can contain malicious code. Suspected supply chain
incidents include the insertion of counterfeit hardware or malicious code into organizational
systems or system components. For federal agencies, an incident that involves personally
identifiable information is considered a breach. A breach results in unauthorized disclosure, the
loss of control, unauthorized acquisition, compromise, or a similar occurrence where a person
other than an authorized user accesses or potentially accesses personally identifiable
information or an authorized user accesses or potentially accesses such information for other
than authorized purposes.
INCIDENT HANDLING | AUTOMATED INCIDENT HANDLING PROCESSES
Support the incident handling process using [Assignment: organization-defined automated
mechanisms].
Discussion: Automated mechanisms that support incident handling processes include online
incident management systems and tools that support the collection of live response data,
full network packet capture, and forensic analysis.
INCIDENT HANDLING | DYNAMIC RECONFIGURATION
Include the following types of dynamic reconfiguration for [Assignment: organizationdefined system components] as part of the incident response capability: [Assignment:
organization-defined types of dynamic reconfiguration].
Discussion: Dynamic reconfiguration includes changes to router rules, access control lists,
intrusion detection or prevention system parameters, and filter rules for guards or firewalls.
Organizations may perform dynamic reconfiguration of systems to stop attacks, misdirect
attackers, and isolate components of systems, thus limiting the extent of the damage from
breaches or compromises. Organizations include specific time frames for achieving the
reconfiguration of systems in the definition of the reconfiguration capability, considering the
potential need for rapid response to effectively address cyber threats.
) INCIDENT HANDLING | CONTINUITY OF OPERATIONS
Identify [Assignment: organization-defined classes of incidents] and take the following
actions in response to those incidents to ensure continuation of organizational mission and
business functions: [Assignment: organization-defined actions to take in response to
classes of incidents].
Discussion: Classes of incidents include malfunctions due to design or implementation
errors and omissions, targeted malicious attacks, and untargeted malicious attacks. Incident
response actions include orderly system degradation, system shutdown, fall back to manual
mode or activation of alternative technology whereby the system operates differently,
employing deceptive measures, alternate information flows, or operating in a mode that is
reserved for when systems are under attack. Organizations consider whether continuity of
operations requirements during an incident conflict with the capability to automatically
disable the system as specified as part of IR-4(5)
INCIDENT HANDLING | INFORMATION CORRELATION
Correlate incident information and individual incident responses to achieve an
organization-wide perspective on incident awareness and response.
Discussion: Sometimes, a threat event, such as a hostile cyber-attack, can only be observed
by bringing together information from different sources, including various reports and
reporting procedures established by organizations.
INCIDENT HANDLING | AUTOMATIC DISABLING OF SYSTEM
Implement a configurable capability to automatically disable the system if [Assignment:
organization-defined security violations] are detected.
Discussion: Organizations consider whether the capability to automatically disable the
system conflicts with continuity of operations requirements specified as part of CP-2 or IR4(3). Security violations include cyber-attacks that have compromised the integrity of the
system or exfiltrated organizational information and serious errors in software programs
that could adversely impact organizational missions or functions or jeopardize the safety of
individuals.
INCIDENT HANDLING | INSIDER THREATS
Implement an incident handling capability for incidents involving insider threats.
Discussion: Explicit focus on handling incidents involving insider threats provides additional
emphasis on this type of threat and the need for specific incident handling capabilities to
provide appropriate and timely responses.
INCIDENT HANDLING | INSIDER THREATS — INTRA-ORGANIZATION COORDINATION
Coordinate an incident handling capability for insider threats that includes the following
organizational entities [Assignment: organization-defined entities].
Discussion: Incident handling for insider threat incidents (e.g., preparation, detection and
analysis, containment, eradication, and recovery) requires coordination among many
organizational entities, including mission or business owners, system owners, human
resources offices, procurement offices, personnel offices, physical security offices, senior
agency information security officer, operations personnel, risk executive (function), senior
agency official for privacy, and legal counsel. In addition, organizations may require external
support from federal, state, and local law enforcement agencies.
INCIDENT HANDLING | CORRELATION WITH EXTERNAL ORGANIZATIONS
Coordinate with [Assignment: organization-defined external organizations] to correlate
and share [Assignment: organization-defined incident information] to achieve a crossorganization perspective on incident awareness and more effective incident responses.
Discussion: The coordination of incident information with external organizations—including
mission or business partners, military or coalition partners, customers, and developers—can
provide significant benefits. Cross-organizational coordination can serve as an important risk
management capability. This capability allows organizations to leverage information from a
variety of sources to effectively respond to incidents and breaches that could potentially
affect the organization’s operations, assets, and individuals.
INCIDENT HANDLING | DYNAMIC RESPONSE CAPABILITY
Employ [Assignment: organization-defined dynamic response capabilities] to respond to
incidents.
Discussion: The dynamic response capability addresses the timely deployment of new or
replacement organizational capabilities in response to incidents. This includes capabilities
implemented at the mission and business process level and at the system level.
INCIDENT HANDLING | SUPPLY CHAIN COORDINATION
Coordinate incident handling activities involving supply chain events with other
organizations involved in the supply chain.
Discussion: Organizations involved in supply chain activities include product developers,
system integrators, manufacturers, packagers, assemblers, distributors, vendors, and
resellers. Supply chain incidents can occur anywhere through or to the supply chain and
include compromises or breaches that involve primary or sub-tier providers, information
technology products, system components, development processes or personnel, and
distribution processes or warehousing facilities. Organizations consider including processes
for protecting and sharing incident information in information exchange agreements and
their obligations for reporting incidents to government oversight bodies (e.g., Federal
Acquisition Security Council).
INCIDENT HANDLING | INTEGRATED INCIDENT RESPONSE TEAM
Establish and maintain an integrated incident response team that can be deployed to any
location identified by the organization in [Assignment: organization-defined time period].
Discussion: An integrated incident response team is a team of experts that assesses,
documents, and responds to incidents so that organizational systems and networks can
recover quickly and implement the necessary controls to avoid future incidents. Incident
response team personnel include forensic and malicious code analysts, tool developers,
systems security and privacy engineers, and real-time operations personnel. The incident
handling capability includes performing rapid forensic preservation of evidence and analysis
of and response to intrusions. For some organizations, the incident response team can be a
cross-organizational entity.
An integrated incident response team facilitates information sharing and allows
organizational personnel (e.g., developers, implementers, and operators) to leverage team
knowledge of the threat and implement defensive measures that enable organizations to
deter intrusions more effectively. Moreover, integrated teams promote the rapid detection
of intrusions, the development of appropriate mitigations, and the deployment of effective
defensive measures. For example, when an intrusion is detected, the integrated team can
rapidly develop an appropriate response for operators to implement, correlate the new
incident with information on past intrusions, and augment ongoing cyber intelligence
development. Integrated incident response teams are better able to identify adversary
tactics, techniques, and procedures that are linked to the operations tempo or specific
mission and business functions and to define responsive actions in a way that does not
disrupt those mission and business functions. Incident response teams can be distributed
within organizations to make the capability resilient
INCIDENT HANDLING | MALICIOUS CODE AND FORENSIC ANALYSIS
Analyze malicious code and/or other residual artifacts remaining in the system after the
incident.
Discussion: When conducted carefully in an isolated environment, analysis of malicious code
and other residual artifacts of a security incident or breach can give the organization insight
into adversary tactics, techniques, and procedures. It can also indicate the identity or some
defining characteristics of the adversary. In addition, malicious code analysis can help the
organization develop responses to future incidents.
)INCIDENT HANDLING | BEHAVIOR ANALYSIS
Analyze anomalous or suspected adversarial behavior in or related to [Assignment:
organization-defined environments or resources].
Discussion: If the organization maintains a deception environment, an analysis of behaviors
in that environment, including resources targeted by the adversary and timing of the
incident or event, can provide insight into adversarial tactics, techniques, and procedures.
External to a deception environment, the analysis of anomalous adversarial behavior (e.g.,
changes in system performance or usage patterns) or suspected behavior (e.g., changes in
searches for the location of specific resources) can give the organization such insight.
)INCIDENT HANDLING | SECURITY OPERATIONS CENTER
Establish and maintain a security operations center.
Discussion: A security operations center (SOC) is the focal point for security operations and
computer network defense for an organization. The purpose of the SOC is to defend and
monitor an organization’s systems and networks (i.e., cyber infrastructure) on an ongoing
basis. The SOC is also responsible for detecting, analyzing, and responding to cybersecurity
incidents in a timely manner. The organization staffs the SOC with skilled technical and
operational personnel (e.g., security analysts, incident response personnel, systems security
engineers) and implements a combination of technical, management, and operational
controls (including monitoring, scanning, and forensics tools) to monitor, fuse, correlate,
analyze, and respond to threat and security-relevant event data from multiple sources.
These sources include perimeter defenses, network devices (e.g., routers, switches), and
endpoint agent data feeds. The SOC provides a holistic situational awareness capability to
help organizations determine the security posture of the system and organization. A SOC
capability can be obtained in a variety of ways. Larger organizations may implement a
dedicated SOC while smaller organizations may employ third-party organizations to provide
such a capability.
INCIDENT HANDLING | PUBLIC RELATIONS AND REPUTATION REPAIR
(a) Manage public relations associated with an incident; and
(b) Employ measures to repair the reputation of the organization.
Discussion: It is important for an organization to have a strategy in place for addressing
incidents that have been brought to the attention of the general public, have cast the
organization in a negative light, or have affected the organization’s constituents (e.g.,
partners, customers). Such publicity can be extremely harmful to the organization and affect
its ability to carry out its mission and business functions. Taking proactive steps to repair the
organization’s reputation is an essential aspect of reestablishing the trust and confidence of
its constituents.
RISK ASSESSMENT
Control:
a. Conduct a risk assessment, including:
1. Identifying threats to and vulnerabilities in the system;
2. Determining the likelihood and magnitude of harm from unauthorized access, use,
disclosure, disruption, modification, or destruction of the system, the information it
processes, stores, or transmits, and any related information; and
3. Determining the likelihood and impact of adverse effects on individuals arising from the
processing of personally identifiable information;
b. Integrate risk assessment results and risk management decisions from the organization and
mission or business process perspectives with system-level risk assessments;
c. Document risk assessment results in [Selection: security and privacy plans; risk assessment
report; [Assignment: organization-defined document]];
d. Review risk assessment results [Assignment: organization-defined frequency];
e. Disseminate risk assessment results to [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or
roles]; and
f. Update the risk assessment [Assignment: organization-defined frequency] or when there are
significant changes to the system, its environment of operation, or other conditions that may
impact the security or privacy state of the system.
Discussion: Risk assessments consider threats, vulnerabilities, likelihood, and impact to
organizational operations and assets, individuals, other organizations, and the Nation. Risk
assessments also consider risk from external parties, including contractors who operate systems
on behalf of the organization, individuals who access organizational systems, service providers,
and outsourcing entities.
Organizations can conduct risk assessments at all three levels in the risk management hierarchy
(i.e., organization level, mission/business process level, or information system level) and at any
stage in the system development life cycle. Risk assessments can also be conducted at various
steps in the Risk Management Framework, including preparation, categorization, control
selection, control implementation, control assessment, authorization, and control monitoring.
Risk assessment is an ongoing activity carried out throughout the system development life cycle.
Risk assessments can also address information related to the system, including system design,
the intended use of the system, testing results, and supply chain-related information or artifacts.
Risk assessments can play an important role in control selection processes, particularly during
the application of tailoring guidance and in the earliest phases of capability determination.
RISK ASSESSMENT | SUPPLY CHAIN RISK ASSESSMENT
(a) Assess supply chain risks associated with [Assignment: organization-defined systems,
system components, and system services]; and
(b) Update the supply chain risk assessment [Assignment: organization-defined
frequency], when there are significant changes to the relevant supply chain, or when
changes to the system, environments of operation, or other conditions may
necessitate a change in the supply chain.
Discussion: Supply chain-related events include disruption, use of defective components,
insertion of counterfeits, theft, malicious development practices, improper delivery
practices, and insertion of malicious code. These events can have a significant impact on the
confidentiality, integrity, or availability of a system and its information and, therefore, can
also adversely impact organizational operations (including mission, functions, image, or
reputation), organizational assets, individuals, other organizations, and the Nation. The
supply chain-related events may be unintentional or malicious and can occur at any point
during the system life cycle. An analysis of supply chain risk can help an organization identify
systems or components for which additional supply chain risk mitigations are required.
RISK ASSESSMENT | USE OF ALL-SOURCE INTELLIGENCE
Use all-source intelligence to assist in the analysis of risk.
Discussion: Organizations employ all-source intelligence to inform engineering, acquisition,
and risk management decisions. All-source intelligence consists of information derived from
all available sources, including publicly available or open-source information, measurement
and signature intelligence, human intelligence, signals intelligence, and imagery intelligence.
All-source intelligence is used to analyze the risk of vulnerabilities (both intentional and
unintentional) from development, manufacturing, and delivery processes, people, and the
environment. The risk analysis may be performed on suppliers at multiple tiers in the supply
chain sufficient to manage risks. Organizations may develop agreements to share all-source
intelligence information or resulting decisions with other organizations, as appropriate.
RISK ASSESSMENT | DYNAMIC THREAT AWARENESS
Determine the current cyber threat environment on an ongoing basis using [Assignment:
organization-defined means].
Discussion: The threat awareness information that is gathered feeds into the organization’s
information security operations to ensure that procedures are updated in response to the
changing threat environment. For example, at higher threat levels, organizations may
change the privilege or authentication thresholds required to perform certain operations.
RISK ASSESSMENT | PREDICTIVE CYBER ANALYTICS
Employ the following advanced automation and analytics capabilities to predict and
identify risks to [Assignment: organization-defined systems or system components]:
[Assignment: organization-defined advanced automation and analytics capabilities].
Discussion: A properly resourced Security Operations Center (SOC) or Computer Incident
Response Team (CIRT) may be overwhelmed by the volume of information generated by the
proliferation of security tools and appliances unless it employs advanced automation and
analytics to analyze the data. Advanced automation and analytics capabilities are typically
supported by artificial intelligence concepts, including machine learning. Examples include
Automated Threat Discovery and Response (which includes broad-based collection, contextbased analysis, and adaptive response capabilities), automated workflow operations, and
machine assisted decision tools. Note, however, that sophisticated adversaries may be able
to extract information related to analytic parameters and retrain the machine learning to
classify malicious activity as benign. Accordingly, machine learning is augmented by human
monitoring to ensure that sophisticated adversaries are not able to conceal their activities.
SYSTEM MONITORING
Control:
a. Monitor the system to detect:
1. Attacks and indicators of potential attacks in accordance with the following monitoring
objectives: [Assignment: organization-defined monitoring objectives]; and
2. Unauthorized local, network, and remote connections;
b. Identify unauthorized use of the system through the following techniques and methods:
[Assignment: organization-defined techniques and methods];
c. Invoke internal monitoring capabilities or deploy monitoring devices:
1. Strategically within the system to collect organization-determined essential information;
and
2. At ad hoc locations within the system to track specific types of transactions of interest
to the organization;
d. Analyze detected events and anomalies;
e. Adjust the level of system monitoring activity when there is a change in risk to organizational
operations and assets, individuals, other organizations, or the Nation;
f. Obtain legal opinion regarding system monitoring activities; and
g. Provide [Assignment: organization-defined system monitoring information] to [Assignment:
organization-defined personnel or roles] [Selection (one or more): as needed; [Assignment:
organization-defined frequency]].
Discussion: System monitoring includes external and internal monitoring. External monitoring
includes the observation of events occurring at external interfaces to the system. Internal
monitoring includes the observation of events occurring within the system. Organizations
monitor systems by observing audit activities in real time or by observing other system aspects
such as access patterns, characteristics of access, and other actions. The monitoring objectives
guide and inform the determination of the events. System monitoring capabilities are achieved
through a variety of tools and techniques, including intrusion detection and prevention systems,
malicious code protection software, scanning tools, audit record monitoring software, and
network monitoring software.
Depending on the security architecture, the distribution and configuration of monitoring devices
may impact throughput at key internal and external boundaries as well as at other locations
across a network due to the introduction of network throughput latency. If throughput
management is needed, such devices are strategically located and deployed as part of an
established organization-wide security architecture. Strategic locations for monitoring devices
include selected perimeter locations and near key servers and server farms that support critical
applications. Monitoring devices are typically employed at the managed interfaces associated
with controls SC-7 and AC-17. The information collected is a function of the organizational
monitoring objectives and the capability of systems to support such objectives. Specific types of
transactions of interest include Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) traffic that bypasses HTTP
proxies. System monitoring is an integral part of organizational continuous monitoring and
incident response programs, and output from system monitoring serves as input to those
programs. System monitoring requirements, including the need for specific types of system
monitoring, may be referenced in other controls
Adjustments to levels of system monitoring are based on law enforcement information,
intelligence information, or other sources of information. The legality of system monitoring
activities is based on applicable laws, executive orders, directives, regulations, policies,
standards, and guidelines.
SYSTEM MONITORING | SYSTEM-WIDE INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM
Connect and configure individual intrusion detection tools into a system-wide intrusion
detection system.
Discussion: Linking individual intrusion detection tools into a system-wide intrusion
detection system provides additional coverage and effective detection capabilities. The
information contained in one intrusion detection tool can be shared widely across the
organization, making the system-wide detection capability more robust and powerful.
SYSTEM MONITORING | AUTOMATED TOOLS AND MECHANISMS FOR REAL-TIME ANALYSIS
Employ automated tools and mechanisms to support near real-time analysis of events.
Discussion: Automated tools and mechanisms include host-based, network-based,
transport-based, or storage-based event monitoring tools and mechanisms or security
information and event management (SIEM) technologies that provide real-time analysis of
alerts and notifications generated by organizational systems. Automated monitoring
techniques can create unintended privacy risks because automated controls may connect to
external or otherwise unrelated systems. The matching of records between these systems
may create linkages with unintended consequences. Organizations assess and document
these risks in their privacy impact assessment and make determinations that are in
alignment with their privacy program plan.
SYSTEM MONITORING | AUTOMATED TOOL AND MECHANISM INTEGRATION
Employ automated tools and mechanisms to integrate intrusion detection tools and
mechanisms into access control and flow control mechanisms.
Discussion: Using automated tools and mechanisms to integrate intrusion detection tools
and mechanisms into access and flow control mechanisms facilitates a rapid response to
attacks by enabling the reconfiguration of mechanisms in support of attack isolation and
elimination.
SYSTEM MONITORING | INBOUND AND OUTBOUND COMMUNICATIONS TRAFFIC
(a) Determine criteria for unusual or unauthorized activities or conditions for inbound
and outbound communications traffic;
(b) Monitor inbound and outbound communications traffic [Assignment: organizationdefined frequency] for [Assignment: organization-defined unusual or unauthorized
activities or conditions].
Discussion: Unusual or unauthorized activities or conditions related to system inbound and
outbound communications traffic includes internal traffic that indicates the presence of
malicious code or unauthorized use of legitimate code or credentials within organizational
systems or propagating among system components, signaling to external systems, and the
unauthorized exporting of information. Evidence of malicious code or unauthorized use of
legitimate code or credentials is used to identify potentially compromised systems or system
components
SYSTEM MONITORING | SYSTEM-GENERATED ALERTS
Alert [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles] when the following systemgenerated indications of compromise or potential compromise occur: [Assignment:
organization-defined compromise indicators].
Discussion: Alerts may be generated from a variety of sources, including audit records or
inputs from malicious code protection mechanisms, intrusion detection or prevention
mechanisms, or boundary protection devices such as firewalls, gateways, and routers. Alerts
can be automated and may be transmitted telephonically, by electronic mail messages, or by
text messaging. Organizational personnel on the alert notification list can include system
administrators, mission or business owners, system owners, information owners/stewards,
senior agency information security officers, senior agency officials for privacy, system
security officers, or privacy officers. In contrast to alerts generated by the system, alerts
generated by organizations in SI-4(12) focus on information sources external to the system,
such as suspicious activity reports and reports on potential insider threats.
SYSTEM MONITORING | AUTOMATED RESPONSE TO SUSPICIOUS EVENTS
(a) Notify [Assignment: organization-defined incident response personnel (identified by
name and/or by role)] of detected suspicious events; and
(b) Take the following actions upon detection: [Assignment: organization-defined leastdisruptive actions to terminate suspicious events].
Discussion: Least-disruptive actions include initiating requests for human responses.
SYSTEM MONITORING | TESTING OF MONITORING TOOLS AND MECHANISMS
Test intrusion-monitoring tools and mechanisms [Assignment: organization-defined
frequency].
Discussion: Testing intrusion-monitoring tools and mechanisms is necessary to ensure that
the tools and mechanisms are operating correctly and continue to satisfy the monitoring
objectives of organizations. The frequency and depth of testing depends on the types of
tools and mechanisms used by organizations and the methods of deployment.
SYSTEM MONITORING | VISIBILITY OF ENCRYPTED COMMUNICATIONS
Make provisions so that [Assignment: organization-defined encrypted communications
traffic] is visible to [Assignment: organization-defined system monitoring tools and
mechanisms].
Discussion: Organizations balance the need to encrypt communications traffic to protect
data confidentiality with the need to maintain visibility into such traffic from a monitoring
perspective. Organizations determine whether the visibility requirement applies to internal
encrypted traffic, encrypted traffic intended for external destinations, or a subset of the
traffic types.
SYSTEM MONITORING | ANALYZE COMMUNICATIONS TRAFFIC ANOMALIES
Analyze outbound communications traffic at the external interfaces to the system and
selected [Assignment: organization-defined interior points within the system] to discover
anomalies.
Discussion: Organization-defined interior points include subnetworks and subsystems.
Anomalies within organizational systems include large file transfers, long-time persistent
connections, attempts to access information from unexpected locations, the use of unusual
protocols and ports, the use of unmonitored network protocols (e.g., IPv6 usage during IPv4
transition), and attempted communications with suspected malicious external addresses.
SYSTEM MONITORING | AUTOMATED ORGANIZATION-GENERATED ALERTS
Alert [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles] using [Assignment:
organization-defined automated mechanisms] when the following indications of
inappropriate or unusual activities with security or privacy implications occur:
[Assignment: organization-defined activities that trigger alerts].
Discussion: Organizational personnel on the system alert notification list include system
administrators, mission or business owners, system owners, senior agency information
security officer, senior agency official for privacy, system security officers, or privacy officers.
Automated organization-generated alerts are the security alerts generated by organizations
and transmitted using automated means. The sources for organization-generated alerts are
focused on other entities such as suspicious activity reports and reports on potential insider
threats. In contrast to alerts generated by the organization, alerts generated by the system
in SI-4(5) focus on information sources that are internal to the systems, such as audit
records.
SYSTEM MONITORING | ANALYZE TRAFFIC AND EVENT PATTERNS
(a) Analyze communications traffic and event patterns for the system;
(b) Develop profiles representing common traffic and event patterns; and
(c) Use the traffic and event profiles in tuning system-monitoring devices.
Discussion: Identifying and understanding common communications traffic and event
patterns help organizations provide useful information to system monitoring devices to
more effectively identify suspicious or anomalous traffic and events when they occur. Such
information can help reduce the number of false positives and false negatives during system
monitoring.
SYSTEM MONITORING | WIRELESS INTRUSION DETECTION
Employ a wireless intrusion detection system to identify rogue wireless devices and to
detect attack attempts and potential compromises or breaches to the system.
Discussion: Wireless signals may radiate beyond organizational facilities. Organizations
proactively search for unauthorized wireless connections, including the conduct of thorough
scans for unauthorized wireless access points. Wireless scans are not limited to those areas
within facilities containing systems but also include areas outside of facilities to verify that
unauthorized wireless access points are not connected to organizational systems.
SYSTEM MONITORING | WIRELESS TO WIRELINE COMMUNICATIONS
Employ an intrusion detection system to monitor wireless communications traffic as the
traffic passes from wireless to wireline networks.
Discussion: Wireless networks are inherently less secure than wired networks. For example,
wireless networks are more susceptible to eavesdroppers or traffic analysis than wireline
networks. When wireless to wireline communications exist, the wireless network could
become a port of entry into the wired network. Given the greater facility of unauthorized
network access via wireless access points compared to unauthorized wired network access
from within the physical boundaries of the system, additional monitoring of transitioning
traffic between wireless and wired networks may be necessary to detect malicious activities.
Employing intrusion detection systems to monitor wireless communications traffic helps to
ensure that the traffic does not contain malicious code prior to transitioning to the wireline
network.
SYSTEM MONITORING | CORRELATE MONITORING INFORMATION
Correlate information from monitoring tools and mechanisms employed throughout the
system.
Discussion: Correlating information from different system monitoring tools and mechanisms
can provide a more comprehensive view of system activity. Correlating system monitoring
tools and mechanisms that typically work in isolation—including malicious code protection
software, host monitoring, and network monitoring—can provide an organization-wide
monitoring view and may reveal otherwise unseen attack patterns. Understanding the
capabilities and limitations of diverse monitoring tools and mechanisms and how to
maximize the use of information generated by those tools and mechanisms can help
organizations develop, operate, and maintain effective monitoring programs. The correlation
of monitoring information is especially important during the transition from older to newer
technologies (e.g., transitioning from IPv4 to IPv6 network protocols).
SYSTEM MONITORING | INTEGRATED SITUATIONAL AWARENESS
Correlate information from monitoring physical, cyber, and supply chain activities to
achieve integrated, organization-wide situational awareness.
Discussion: Correlating monitoring information from a more diverse set of information
sources helps to achieve integrated situational awareness. Integrated situational awareness
from a combination of physical, cyber, and supply chain monitoring activities enhances the
capability of organizations to more quickly detect sophisticated attacks and investigate the
methods and techniques employed to carry out such attacks. In contrast to SI-4(16), which
correlates the various cyber monitoring information, integrated situational awareness is
intended to correlate monitoring beyond the cyber domain. Correlation of monitoring
information from multiple activities may help reveal attacks on organizations that are
operating across multiple attack vectors.
SYSTEM MONITORING | ANALYZE TRAFFIC AND COVERT EXFILTRATION
Analyze outbound communications traffic at external interfaces to the system and at the
following interior points to detect covert exfiltration of information: [Assignment:
organization-defined interior points within the system].
Discussion: Organization-defined interior points include subnetworks and subsystems.
Covert means that can be used to exfiltrate information include steganography
SYSTEM MONITORING | RISK FOR INDIVIDUALS
Implement [Assignment: organization-defined additional monitoring] of individuals who
have been identified by [Assignment: organization-defined sources] as posing an increased
level of risk.
Discussion: Indications of increased risk from individuals can be obtained from different
sources, including personnel records, intelligence agencies, law enforcement organizations,
and other sources. The monitoring of individuals is coordinated with the management, legal,
security, privacy, and human resource officials who conduct such monitoring. Monitoring is
conducted in accordance with applicable laws, executive orders, directives, regulations,
policies, standards, and guidelines.
SYSTEM MONITORING | PRIVILEGED USERS
Implement the following additional monitoring of privileged users: [Assignment:
organization-defined additional monitoring].
Discussion: Privileged users have access to more sensitive information, including securityrelated information, than the general user population. Access to such information means
that privileged users can potentially do greater damage to systems and organizations than
non-privileged users. Therefore, implementing additional monitoring on privileged users
helps to ensure that organizations can identify malicious activity at the earliest possible time
and take appropriate actions.
SYSTEM MONITORING | PROBATIONARY PERIODS
Implement the following additional monitoring of individuals during [Assignment:
organization-defined probationary period]: [Assignment: organization-defined additional
monitoring].
Discussion: During probationary periods, employees do not have permanent employment
status within organizations. Without such status or access to information that is resident on
the system, additional monitoring can help identify any potentially malicious activity or
inappropriate behavior
SYSTEM MONITORING | UNAUTHORIZED NETWORK SERVICES
(a) Detect network services that have not been authorized or approved by [Assignment:
organization-defined authorization or approval processes]; and
(b) [Selection (one or more): Audit; Alert [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or
roles]] when detected.
Discussion: Unauthorized or unapproved network services include services in serviceoriented architectures that lack organizational verification or validation and may therefore
be unreliable or serve as malicious rogues for valid services
SYSTEM MONITORING | HOST-BASED DEVICES
Implement the following host-based monitoring mechanisms at [Assignment:
organization-defined system components]: [Assignment: organization-defined host-based
monitoring mechanisms].
Discussion: Host-based monitoring collects information about the host (or system in which it
resides). System components in which host-based monitoring can be implemented include
servers, notebook computers, and mobile devices. Organizations may consider employing
host-based monitoring mechanisms from multiple product developers or vendors.
SYSTEM MONITORING | INDICATORS OF COMPROMISE
Discover, collect, and distribute to [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles],
indicators of compromise provided by [Assignment: organization-defined sources].
Discussion: Indicators of compromise (IOC) are forensic artifacts from intrusions that are
identified on organizational systems at the host or network level. IOCs provide valuable
information on systems that have been compromised. IOCs can include the creation of
registry key values. IOCs for network traffic include Universal Resource Locator or protocol
elements that indicate malicious code command and control servers. The rapid distribution
and adoption of IOCs can improve information security by reducing the time that systems
and organizations are vulnerable to the same exploit or attack. Threat indicators, signatures,
tactics, techniques, procedures, and other indicators of compromise may be available via
government and non-government cooperatives, including the Forum of Incident Response
and Security Teams, the United States Computer Emergency Readiness Team, the Defense
Industrial Base Cybersecurity Information Sharing Program, and the CERT Coordination
Center.
SYSTEM MONITORING | OPTIMIZE NETWORK TRAFFIC ANALYSIS
Provide visibility into network traffic at external and key internal system interfaces to
optimize the effectiveness of monitoring devices.
Discussion: Encrypted traffic, asymmetric routing architectures, capacity and latency
limitations, and transitioning from older to newer technologies (e.g., IPv4 to IPv6 network
protocol transition) may result in blind spots for organizations when analyzing network
traffic. Collecting, decrypting, pre-processing, and distributing only relevant traffic to
monitoring devices can streamline the efficiency and use of devices and optimize traffic
analysis.