DE.AE-1: A baseline of network operations and expected data flows for users and systems is established and managed
INFORMATION FLOW ENFORCEMENT
Control: Enforce approved authorizations for controlling the flow of information within the
system and between connected systems based on [Assignment: organization-defined
information flow control policies].
Discussion: Information flow control regulates where information can travel within a system and
between systems (in contrast to who is allowed to access the information) and without regard to
subsequent accesses to that information. Flow control restrictions include blocking external
traffic that claims to be from within the organization, keeping export-controlled information
from being transmitted in the clear to the Internet, restricting web requests that are not from
the internal web proxy server, and limiting information transfers between organizations based
on data structures and content. Transferring information between organizations may require an
agreement specifying how the information flow is enforced (see CA-3). Transferring information
between systems in different security or privacy domains with different security or privacy
policies introduces the risk that such transfers violate one or more domain security or privacy
policies. In such situations, information owners/stewards provide guidance at designated policy
enforcement points between connected systems. Organizations consider mandating specific
architectural solutions to enforce specific security and privacy policies. Enforcement includes
prohibiting information transfers between connected systems (i.e., allowing access only),
verifying write permissions before accepting information from another security or privacy
domain or connected system, employing hardware mechanisms to enforce one-way information
flows, and implementing trustworthy regrading mechanisms to reassign security or privacy
attributes and labels.
Organizations commonly employ information flow control policies and enforcement mechanisms
to control the flow of information between designated sources and destinations within systems
and between connected systems. Flow control is based on the characteristics of the information
and/or the information path. Enforcement occurs, for example, in boundary protection devices
that employ rule sets or establish configuration settings that restrict system services, provide a
packet-filtering capability based on header information, or provide a message-filtering capability
based on message content. Organizations also consider the trustworthiness of filtering and/or
inspection mechanisms (i.e., hardware, firmware, and software components) that are critical to
information flow enforcement. Control enhancements 3 through 32 primarily address crossdomain solution needs that focus on more advanced filtering techniques, in-depth analysis, and
stronger flow enforcement mechanisms implemented in cross-domain products, such as highassurance guards. Such capabilities are generally not available in commercial off-the-shelf
products. Information flow enforcement also applies to control plane traffic (e.g., routing and
DNS).
INFORMATION FLOW ENFORCEMENT | OBJECT SECURITY AND PRIVACY ATTRIBUTES
Use [Assignment: organization-defined security and privacy attributes] associated with
[Assignment: organization-defined information, source, and destination objects] to enforce
[Assignment: organization-defined information flow control policies] as a basis for flow
control decisions.
Discussion: Information flow enforcement mechanisms compare security and privacy
attributes associated with information (i.e., data content and structure) and source and
destination objects and respond appropriately when the enforcement mechanisms
encounter information flows not explicitly allowed by information flow policies. For
example, an information object labeled Secret would be allowed to flow to a destination
object labeled Secret, but an information object labeled Top Secret would not be allowed to
flow to a destination object labeled Secret. A dataset of personally identifiable information
may be tagged with restrictions against combining with other types of datasets and, thus,
would not be allowed to flow to the restricted dataset. Security and privacy attributes can
also include source and destination addresses employed in traffic filter firewalls. Flow
enforcement using explicit security or privacy attributes can be used, for example, to control
the release of certain types of information.
INFORMATION FLOW ENFORCEMENT | PROCESSING DOMAINS
Use protected processing domains to enforce [Assignment: organization-defined
information flow control policies] as a basis for flow control decisions.
Discussion: Protected processing domains within systems are processing spaces that have
controlled interactions with other processing spaces, enabling control of information flows
between these spaces and to/from information objects. A protected processing domain can
be provided, for example, by implementing domain and type enforcement. In domain and
type enforcement, system processes are assigned to domains, information is identified by
types, and information flows are controlled based on allowed information accesses (i.e.,
determined by domain and type), allowed signaling among domains, and allowed process
transitions to other domains.
INFORMATION FLOW ENFORCEMENT | DYNAMIC INFORMATION FLOW CONTROL
Enforce [Assignment: organization-defined information flow control policies].
Discussion: Organizational policies regarding dynamic information flow control include
allowing or disallowing information flows based on changing conditions or mission or
operational considerations. Changing conditions include changes in risk tolerance due to
changes in the immediacy of mission or business needs, changes in the threat environment,
and detection of potentially harmful or adverse events.
INFORMATION FLOW ENFORCEMENT | FLOW CONTROL OF ENCRYPTED INFORMATION
Prevent encrypted information from bypassing [Assignment: organization-defined
information flow control mechanisms] by [Selection (one or more): decrypting the
information; blocking the flow of the encrypted information; terminating communications
sessions attempting to pass encrypted information; [Assignment: organization-defined
procedure or method]].
Discussion: Flow control mechanisms include content checking, security policy filters, and
data type identifiers. The term encryption is extended to cover encoded data not recognized
by filtering mechanisms.
) INFORMATION FLOW ENFORCEMENT | EMBEDDED DATA TYPES
Enforce [Assignment: organization-defined limitations] on embedding data types within
other data types.
Discussion: Embedding data types within other data types may result in reduced flow
control effectiveness. Data type embedding includes inserting files as objects within other
files and using compressed or archived data types that may include multiple embedded data
types. Limitations on data type embedding consider the levels of embedding and prohibit
levels of data type embedding that are beyond the capability of the inspection tools.
) INFORMATION FLOW ENFORCEMENT | METADATA
Enforce information flow control based on [Assignment: organization-defined metadata].
Discussion: Metadata is information that describes the characteristics of data. Metadata can
include structural metadata describing data structures or descriptive metadata describing
data content. Enforcement of allowed information flows based on metadata enables simpler
and more effective flow control. Organizations consider the trustworthiness of metadata
regarding data accuracy (i.e., knowledge that the metadata values are correct with respect
to the data), data integrity (i.e., protecting against unauthorized changes to metadata tags),
and the binding of metadata to the data payload (i.e., employing sufficiently strong binding
techniques with appropriate assurance).
) INFORMATION FLOW ENFORCEMENT | ONE-WAY FLOW MECHANISMS
Enforce one-way information flows through hardware-based flow control mechanisms.
Discussion: One-way flow mechanisms may also be referred to as a unidirectional network,
unidirectional security gateway, or data diode. One-way flow mechanisms can be used to
prevent data from being exported from a higher impact or classified domain or system while
permitting data from a lower impact or unclassified domain or system to be imported.
INFORMATION FLOW ENFORCEMENT | SECURITY AND PRIVACY POLICY FILTERS
(a) Enforce information flow control using [Assignment: organization-defined security or
privacy policy filters] as a basis for flow control decisions for [Assignment:
organization-defined information flows]; and
(b) [Selection (one or more): Block; Strip; Modify; Quarantine] data after a filter
processing failure in accordance with [Assignment: organization-defined security or
privacy policy].
Discussion: Organization-defined security or privacy policy filters can address data
structures and content. For example, security or privacy policy filters for data structures can
check for maximum file lengths, maximum field sizes, and data/file types (for structured and
unstructured data). Security or privacy policy filters for data content can check for specific
words, enumerated values or data value ranges, and hidden content. Structured data
permits the interpretation of data content by applications. Unstructured data refers to
digital information without a data structure or with a data structure that does not facilitate
the development of rule sets to address the impact or classification level of the information
conveyed by the data or the flow enforcement decisions. Unstructured data consists of
bitmap objects that are inherently non-language-based (i.e., image, video, or audio files) and
textual objects that are based on written or printed languages. Organizations can implement
more than one security or privacy policy filter to meet information flow control objectives.
INFORMATION FLOW ENFORCEMENT | HUMAN REVIEWS
Enforce the use of human reviews for [Assignment: organization-defined information
flows] under the following conditions: [Assignment: organization-defined conditions].
Discussion: Organizations define security or privacy policy filters for all situations where
automated flow control decisions are possible. When a fully automated flow control decision
is not possible, then a human review may be employed in lieu of or as a complement to
automated security or privacy policy filtering. Human reviews may also be employed as
deemed necessary by organizations.
INFORMATION FLOW ENFORCEMENT | ENABLE AND DISABLE SECURITY OR PRIVACY POLICY FILTERS
Provide the capability for privileged administrators to enable and disable [Assignment:
organization-defined security or privacy policy filters] under the following conditions:
[Assignment: organization-defined conditions].
Discussion: For example, as allowed by the system authorization, administrators can enable
security or privacy policy filters to accommodate approved data types. Administrators also
have the capability to select the filters that are executed on a specific data flow based on the
type of data that is being transferred, the source and destination security domains, and
other security or privacy relevant features, as needed.
)INFORMATION FLOW ENFORCEMENT | CONFIGURATION OF SECURITY OR PRIVACY POLICY FILTERS
Provide the capability for privileged administrators to configure [Assignment:
organization-defined security or privacy policy filters] to support different security or
privacy policies.
Discussion: Documentation contains detailed information for configuring security or privacy
policy filters. For example, administrators can configure security or privacy policy filters to
include the list of inappropriate words that security or privacy policy mechanisms check in
accordance with the definitions provided by organizations.
)INFORMATION FLOW ENFORCEMENT | DATA TYPE IDENTIFIERS
When transferring information between different security domains, use [Assignment:
organization-defined data type identifiers] to validate data essential for information flow
decisions.
Discussion: Data type identifiers include filenames, file types, file signatures or tokens, and
multiple internal file signatures or tokens. Systems only allow transfer of data that is
compliant with data type format specifications. Identification and validation of data types is
based on defined specifications associated with each allowed data format. The filename and
number alone are not used for data type identification. Content is validated syntactically and
semantically against its specification to ensure that it is the proper data type.
)INFORMATION FLOW ENFORCEMENT | DECOMPOSITION INTO POLICY-RELEVANT SUBCOMPONENTS
When transferring information between different security domains, decompose
information into [Assignment: organization-defined policy-relevant subcomponents] for
submission to policy enforcement mechanisms.
Discussion: Decomposing information into policy-relevant subcomponents prior to
information transfer facilitates policy decisions on source, destination, certificates,
classification, attachments, and other security- or privacy-related component differentiators.
Policy enforcement mechanisms apply filtering, inspection, and/or sanitization rules to the
policy-relevant subcomponents of information to facilitate flow enforcement prior to
transferring such information to different security domains.
INFORMATION FLOW ENFORCEMENT | SECURITY OR PRIVACY POLICY FILTER CONSTRAINTS
When transferring information between different security domains, implement
[Assignment: organization-defined security or privacy policy filters] requiring fully
enumerated formats that restrict data structure and content.
Discussion: Data structure and content restrictions reduce the range of potential malicious
or unsanctioned content in cross-domain transactions. Security or privacy policy filters that
restrict data structures include restricting file sizes and field lengths. Data content policy
filters include encoding formats for character sets, restricting character data fields to only
contain alpha-numeric characters, prohibiting special characters, and validating schema
structures
INFORMATION FLOW ENFORCEMENT | DETECTION OF UNSANCTIONED INFORMATION
When transferring information between different security domains, examine the
information for the presence of [Assignment: organization-defined unsanctioned
information] and prohibit the transfer of such information in accordance with the
[Assignment: organization-defined security or privacy policy].
Discussion: Unsanctioned information includes malicious code, information that is
inappropriate for release from the source network, or executable code that could disrupt or
harm the services or systems on the destination network.
INFORMATION FLOW ENFORCEMENT | DOMAIN AUTHENTICATION
Uniquely identify and authenticate source and destination points by [Selection (one or
more): organization; system; application; service; individual] for information transfer.
Discussion: Attribution is a critical component of a security and privacy concept of
operations. The ability to identify source and destination points for information flowing
within systems allows the forensic reconstruction of events and encourages policy
compliance by attributing policy violations to specific organizations or individuals. Successful
domain authentication requires that system labels distinguish among systems, organizations,
and individuals involved in preparing, sending, receiving, or disseminating information.
Attribution also allows organizations to better maintain the lineage of personally identifiable
information processing as it flows through systems and can facilitate consent tracking, as
well as correction, deletion, or access requests from individuals
)INFORMATION FLOW ENFORCEMENT | VALIDATION OF METADATA
When transferring information between different security domains, implement
[Assignment: organization-defined security or privacy policy filters] on metadata.
Discussion: All information (including metadata and the data to which the metadata applies)
is subject to filtering and inspection. Some organizations distinguish between metadata and
data payloads (i.e., only the data to which the metadata is bound). Other organizations do
not make such distinctions and consider metadata and the data to which the metadata
applies to be part of the payload.
INFORMATION FLOW ENFORCEMENT | APPROVED SOLUTIONS
Employ [Assignment: organization-defined solutions in approved configurations] to control
the flow of [Assignment: organization-defined information] across security domains.
Discussion: Organizations define approved solutions and configurations in cross-domain
policies and guidance in accordance with the types of information flows across classification
boundaries. The National Security Agency (NSA) National Cross Domain Strategy and
Management Office provides a listing of approved cross-domain solutions. Contact
ncdsmo@nsa.gov for more information.
)INFORMATION FLOW ENFORCEMENT | PHYSICAL OR LOGICAL SEPARATION OF INFORMATION FLOWS
Separate information flows logically or physically using [Assignment: organization-defined
mechanisms and/or techniques] to accomplish [Assignment: organization-defined required
separations by types of information].
Discussion: Enforcing the separation of information flows associated with defined types of
data can enhance protection by ensuring that information is not commingled while in transit
and by enabling flow control by transmission paths that are not otherwise achievable. Types
of separable information include inbound and outbound communications traffic, service
requests and responses, and information of differing security impact or classification levels.
)INFORMATION FLOW ENFORCEMENT | ACCESS ONLY
Provide access from a single device to computing platforms, applications, or data residing
in multiple different security domains, while preventing information flow between the
different security domains.
Discussion: The system provides a capability for users to access each connected security
domain without providing any mechanisms to allow users to transfer data or information
between the different security domains. An example of an access-only solution is a terminal
that provides a user access to information with different security classifications while
assuredly keeping the information separate.
)INFORMATION FLOW ENFORCEMENT | MODIFY NON-RELEASABLE INFORMATION
When transferring information between different security domains, modify non-releasable
information by implementing [Assignment: organization-defined modification action].
Discussion: Modifying non-releasable information can help prevent a data spill or attack
when information is transferred across security domains. Modification actions include
masking, permutation, alteration, removal, or redaction.
INFORMATION FLOW ENFORCEMENT | INTERNAL NORMALIZED FORMAT
When transferring information between different security domains, parse incoming data
into an internal normalized format and regenerate the data to be consistent with its
intended specification.
Discussion: Converting data into normalized forms is one of most of effective mechanisms
to stop malicious attacks and large classes of data exfiltration.
)INFORMATION FLOW ENFORCEMENT | DATA SANITIZATION
When transferring information between different security domains, sanitize data to
minimize [Selection (one or more): delivery of malicious content, command and control of
malicious code, malicious code augmentation, and steganography encoded data; spillage
of sensitive information] in accordance with [Assignment: organization-defined policy]].
Discussion: Data sanitization is the process of irreversibly removing or destroying data
stored on a memory device (e.g., hard drives, flash memory/solid state drives, mobile
devices, CDs, and DVDs) or in hard copy form.
INFORMATION FLOW ENFORCEMENT | AUDIT FILTERING ACTIONS
When transferring information between different security domains, record and audit
content filtering actions and results for the information being filtered.
Discussion: Content filtering is the process of inspecting information as it traverses a crossdomain solution and determines if the information meets a predefined policy. Content
filtering actions and the results of filtering actions are recorded for individual messages to
ensure that the correct filter actions were applied. Content filter reports are used to assist in
troubleshooting actions by, for example, determining why message content was modified
and/or why it failed the filtering process. Audit events are defined in AU-2. Audit records are
generated in AU-12.
)INFORMATION FLOW ENFORCEMENT | REDUNDANT/INDEPENDENT FILTERING MECHANISMS
When transferring information between different security domains, implement content
filtering solutions that provide redundant and independent filtering mechanisms for each
data type.
Discussion: Content filtering is the process of inspecting information as it traverses a crossdomain solution and determines if the information meets a predefined policy. Redundant
and independent content filtering eliminates a single point of failure filtering system.
Independence is defined as the implementation of a content filter that uses a different code
base and supporting libraries (e.g., two JPEG filters using different vendors’ JPEG libraries)
and multiple, independent system processes.
INFORMATION FLOW ENFORCEMENT | LINEAR FILTER PIPELINES
When transferring information between different security domains, implement a linear
content filter pipeline that is enforced with discretionary and mandatory access controls.
Discussion: Content filtering is the process of inspecting information as it traverses a crossdomain solution and determines if the information meets a predefined policy. The use of
linear content filter pipelines ensures that filter processes are non-bypassable and always
invoked. In general, the use of parallel filtering architectures for content filtering of a single
data type introduces bypass and non-invocation issues.
)INFORMATION FLOW ENFORCEMENT | FILTER ORCHESTRATION ENGINES
When transferring information between different security domains, employ content filter
orchestration engines to ensure that:
(a) Content filtering mechanisms successfully complete execution without errors; and
(b) Content filtering actions occur in the correct order and comply with [Assignment:
organization-defined policy].
Discussion: Content filtering is the process of inspecting information as it traverses a crossdomain solution and determines if the information meets a predefined security policy. An
orchestration engine coordinates the sequencing of activities (manual and automated) in a
content filtering process. Errors are defined as either anomalous actions or unexpected
termination of the content filter process. This is not the same as a filter failing content due
to non-compliance with policy. Content filter reports are a commonly used mechanism to
ensure that expected filtering actions are completed successfully.
INFORMATION FLOW ENFORCEMENT | FILTER MECHANISMS USING MULTIPLE PROCESSES
When transferring information between different security domains, implement content
filtering mechanisms using multiple processes.
Discussion: The use of multiple processes to implement content filtering mechanisms
reduces the likelihood of a single point of failure
)INFORMATION FLOW ENFORCEMENT | FAILED CONTENT TRANSFER PREVENTION
When transferring information between different security domains, prevent the transfer
of failed content to the receiving domain.
Discussion: Content that failed filtering checks can corrupt the system if transferred to the
receiving domain.
INFORMATION FLOW ENFORCEMENT | PROCESS REQUIREMENTS FOR INFORMATION TRANSFER
When transferring information between different security domains, the process that
transfers information between filter pipelines:
(a) Does not filter message content;
(b) Validates filtering metadata;
(c) Ensures the content associated with the filtering metadata has successfully completed
filtering; and
(d) Transfers the content to the destination filter pipeline.
Discussion: The processes transferring information between filter pipelines have minimum
complexity and functionality to provide assurance that the processes operate correctly.
INFORMATION EXCHANGE
Control:
a. Approve and manage the exchange of information between the system and other systems
using [Selection (one or more): interconnection security agreements; information exchange
security agreements; memoranda of understanding or agreement; service level agreements;
user agreements; nondisclosure agreements; [Assignment: organization-defined type of
agreement]];
b. Document, as part of each exchange agreement, the interface characteristics, security and
privacy requirements, controls, and responsibilities for each system, and the impact level of
the information communicated; and
c. Review and update the agreements [Assignment: organization-defined frequency].
Discussion: System information exchange requirements apply to information exchanges
between two or more systems. System information exchanges include connections via leased
lines or virtual private networks, connections to internet service providers, database sharing or
exchanges of database transaction information, connections and exchanges with cloud services,
exchanges via web-based services, or exchanges of files via file transfer protocols, network
protocols (e.g., IPv4, IPv6), email, or other organization-to-organization communications.
Organizations consider the risk related to new or increased threats that may be introduced when
systems exchange information with other systems that may have different security and privacy
requirements and controls. This includes systems within the same organization and systems that
are external to the organization. A joint authorization of the systems exchanging information, as
described in CA-6(1) or CA-6(2), may help to communicate and reduce risk.
Authorizing officials determine the risk associated with system information exchange and the
controls needed for appropriate risk mitigation. The types of agreements selected are based on
factors such as the impact level of the information being exchanged, the relationship between
the organizations exchanging information (e.g., government to government, government to
business, business to business, government or business to service provider, government or
business to individual), or the level of access to the organizational system by users of the other
system. If systems that exchange information have the same authorizing official, organizations
need not develop agreements. Instead, the interface characteristics between the systems (e.g.,
how the information is being exchanged. how the information is protected) are described in the
respective security and privacy plans. If the systems that exchange information have different
authorizing officials within the same organization, the organizations can develop agreements or
provide the same information that would be provided in the appropriate agreement type from
CA-3a in the respective security and privacy plans for the systems. Organizations may incorporate
agreement information into formal contracts, especially for information exchanges established
between federal agencies and nonfederal organizations (including service providers, contractors,
system developers, and system integrators). Risk considerations include systems that share the
same networks.
INFORMATION EXCHANGE | TRANSFER AUTHORIZATIONS
Verify that individuals or systems transferring data between interconnecting systems have
the requisite authorizations (i.e., write permissions or privileges) prior to accepting such
data.
Discussion: To prevent unauthorized individuals and systems from making information
transfers to protected systems, the protected system verifies—via independent means—
whether the individual or system attempting to transfer information is authorized to do so.
Verification of the authorization to transfer information also applies to control plane traffic
(e.g., routing and DNS) and services (e.g., authenticated SMTP relays).
INFORMATION EXCHANGE |TRANSITIVE INFORMATION EXCHANGES
(a) Identify transitive (downstream) information exchanges with other systems through
the systems identified in CA-3a; and
(b) Take measures to ensure that transitive (downstream) information exchanges cease
when the controls on identified transitive (downstream) systems cannot be verified or
validated.
Discussion: Transitive or “downstream” information exchanges are information exchanges
between the system or systems with which the organizational system exchanges information
and other systems. For mission-essential systems, services, and applications, including high
value assets, it is necessary to identify such information exchanges. The transparency of the
controls or protection measures in place in such downstream systems connected directly or
indirectly to organizational systems is essential to understanding the security and privacy
risks resulting from those information exchanges. Organizational systems can inherit risk
from downstream systems through transitive connections and information exchanges, which
can make the organizational systems more susceptible to threats, hazards, and adverse
impacts
BASELINE CONFIGURATION
Control:
a. Develop, document, and maintain under configuration control, a current baseline
configuration of the system; and
b. Review and update the baseline configuration of the system:
1. [Assignment: organization-defined frequency];
2. When required due to [Assignment: organization-defined circumstances]; and
3. When system components are installed or upgraded.
Discussion: Baseline configurations for systems and system components include connectivity,
operational, and communications aspects of systems. Baseline configurations are documented,
formally reviewed, and agreed-upon specifications for systems or configuration items within
those systems. Baseline configurations serve as a basis for future builds, releases, or changes to
systems and include security and privacy control implementations, operational procedures,
information about system components, network topology, and logical placement of components
in the system architecture. Maintaining baseline configurations requires creating new baselines
as organizational systems change over time. Baseline configurations of systems reflect the
current enterprise architecture.
BASELINE CONFIGURATION | AUTOMATION SUPPORT FOR ACCURACY AND CURRENCY
Maintain the currency, completeness, accuracy, and availability of the baseline
configuration of the system using [Assignment: organization-defined automated
mechanisms].
Discussion: Automated mechanisms that help organizations maintain consistent baseline
configurations for systems include configuration management tools, hardware, software,
firmware inventory tools, and network management tools. Automated tools can be used at
the organization level, mission and business process level, or system level on workstations,
servers, notebook computers, network components, or mobile devices. Tools can be used to
track version numbers on operating systems, applications, types of software installed, and
current patch levels. Automation support for accuracy and currency can be satisfied by the
implementation of CM-8(2) for organizations that combine system component inventory and
baseline configuration activities.
BASELINE CONFIGURATION | RETENTION OF PREVIOUS CONFIGURATIONS
Retain [Assignment: organization-defined number] of previous versions of baseline
configurations of the system to support rollback.
Discussion: Retaining previous versions of baseline configurations to support rollback
include hardware, software, firmware, configuration files, configuration records, and
associated documentation.
BASELINE CONFIGURATION | UNAUTHORIZED SOFTWARE
Maintain a baseline configuration for system development and test environments that is
managed separately from the operational baseline configuration.
Discussion: Establishing separate baseline configurations for development, testing, and
operational environments protects systems from unplanned or unexpected events related to
development and testing activities. Separate baseline configurations allow organizations to
apply the configuration management that is most appropriate for each type of configuration.
For example, the management of operational configurations typically emphasizes the need
for stability, while the management of development or test configurations requires greater
flexibility. Configurations in the test environment mirror configurations in the operational
environment to the extent practicable so that the results of the testing are representative of
the proposed changes to the operational systems. Separate baseline configurations do not
necessarily require separate physical environments
BASELINE CONFIGURATION | CONFIGURE SYSTEMS AND COMPONENTS FOR HIGH-RISK AREAS
(a) Issue [Assignment: organization-defined systems or system components] with
[Assignment: organization-defined configurations] to individuals traveling to locations
that the organization deems to be of significant risk; and
(b) Apply the following controls to the systems or components when the individuals
return from travel: [Assignment: organization-defined controls].
Discussion: When it is known that systems or system components will be in high-risk areas
external to the organization, additional controls may be implemented to counter the
increased threat in such areas. For example, organizations can take actions for notebook
computers used by individuals departing on and returning from travel. Actions include
determining the locations that are of concern, defining the required configurations for the
components, ensuring that components are configured as intended before travel is initiated,
and applying controls to the components after travel is completed. Specially configured
notebook computers include computers with sanitized hard drives, limited applications, and
more stringent configuration settings. Controls applied to mobile devices upon return from
travel include examining the mobile device for signs of physical tampering and purging and
reimaging disk drives. Protecting information that resides on mobile devices is addressed in
the MP (Media Protection) family
SYSTEM MONITORING
Control:
a. Monitor the system to detect:
1. Attacks and indicators of potential attacks in accordance with the following monitoring
objectives: [Assignment: organization-defined monitoring objectives]; and
2. Unauthorized local, network, and remote connections;
b. Identify unauthorized use of the system through the following techniques and methods:
[Assignment: organization-defined techniques and methods];
c. Invoke internal monitoring capabilities or deploy monitoring devices:
1. Strategically within the system to collect organization-determined essential information;
and
2. At ad hoc locations within the system to track specific types of transactions of interest
to the organization;
d. Analyze detected events and anomalies;
e. Adjust the level of system monitoring activity when there is a change in risk to organizational
operations and assets, individuals, other organizations, or the Nation;
f. Obtain legal opinion regarding system monitoring activities; and
g. Provide [Assignment: organization-defined system monitoring information] to [Assignment:
organization-defined personnel or roles] [Selection (one or more): as needed; [Assignment:
organization-defined frequency]].
Discussion: System monitoring includes external and internal monitoring. External monitoring
includes the observation of events occurring at external interfaces to the system. Internal
monitoring includes the observation of events occurring within the system. Organizations
monitor systems by observing audit activities in real time or by observing other system aspects
such as access patterns, characteristics of access, and other actions. The monitoring objectives
guide and inform the determination of the events. System monitoring capabilities are achieved
through a variety of tools and techniques, including intrusion detection and prevention systems,
malicious code protection software, scanning tools, audit record monitoring software, and
network monitoring software.
Depending on the security architecture, the distribution and configuration of monitoring devices
may impact throughput at key internal and external boundaries as well as at other locations
across a network due to the introduction of network throughput latency. If throughput
management is needed, such devices are strategically located and deployed as part of an
established organization-wide security architecture. Strategic locations for monitoring devices
include selected perimeter locations and near key servers and server farms that support critical
applications. Monitoring devices are typically employed at the managed interfaces associated
with controls SC-7 and AC-17. The information collected is a function of the organizational
monitoring objectives and the capability of systems to support such objectives. Specific types of
transactions of interest include Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) traffic that bypasses HTTP
proxies. System monitoring is an integral part of organizational continuous monitoring and
incident response programs, and output from system monitoring serves as input to those
programs. System monitoring requirements, including the need for specific types of system
monitoring, may be referenced in other controls
Adjustments to levels of system monitoring are based on law enforcement information,
intelligence information, or other sources of information. The legality of system monitoring
activities is based on applicable laws, executive orders, directives, regulations, policies,
standards, and guidelines.
SYSTEM MONITORING | SYSTEM-WIDE INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM
Connect and configure individual intrusion detection tools into a system-wide intrusion
detection system.
Discussion: Linking individual intrusion detection tools into a system-wide intrusion
detection system provides additional coverage and effective detection capabilities. The
information contained in one intrusion detection tool can be shared widely across the
organization, making the system-wide detection capability more robust and powerful.
SYSTEM MONITORING | AUTOMATED TOOLS AND MECHANISMS FOR REAL-TIME ANALYSIS
Employ automated tools and mechanisms to support near real-time analysis of events.
Discussion: Automated tools and mechanisms include host-based, network-based,
transport-based, or storage-based event monitoring tools and mechanisms or security
information and event management (SIEM) technologies that provide real-time analysis of
alerts and notifications generated by organizational systems. Automated monitoring
techniques can create unintended privacy risks because automated controls may connect to
external or otherwise unrelated systems. The matching of records between these systems
may create linkages with unintended consequences. Organizations assess and document
these risks in their privacy impact assessment and make determinations that are in
alignment with their privacy program plan.
SYSTEM MONITORING | AUTOMATED TOOL AND MECHANISM INTEGRATION
Employ automated tools and mechanisms to integrate intrusion detection tools and
mechanisms into access control and flow control mechanisms.
Discussion: Using automated tools and mechanisms to integrate intrusion detection tools
and mechanisms into access and flow control mechanisms facilitates a rapid response to
attacks by enabling the reconfiguration of mechanisms in support of attack isolation and
elimination.
SYSTEM MONITORING | INBOUND AND OUTBOUND COMMUNICATIONS TRAFFIC
(a) Determine criteria for unusual or unauthorized activities or conditions for inbound
and outbound communications traffic;
(b) Monitor inbound and outbound communications traffic [Assignment: organizationdefined frequency] for [Assignment: organization-defined unusual or unauthorized
activities or conditions].
Discussion: Unusual or unauthorized activities or conditions related to system inbound and
outbound communications traffic includes internal traffic that indicates the presence of
malicious code or unauthorized use of legitimate code or credentials within organizational
systems or propagating among system components, signaling to external systems, and the
unauthorized exporting of information. Evidence of malicious code or unauthorized use of
legitimate code or credentials is used to identify potentially compromised systems or system
components.
SYSTEM MONITORING | SYSTEM-GENERATED ALERTS
Alert [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles] when the following systemgenerated indications of compromise or potential compromise occur: [Assignment:
organization-defined compromise indicators].
Discussion: Alerts may be generated from a variety of sources, including audit records or
inputs from malicious code protection mechanisms, intrusion detection or prevention
mechanisms, or boundary protection devices such as firewalls, gateways, and routers. Alerts
can be automated and may be transmitted telephonically, by electronic mail messages, or by
text messaging. Organizational personnel on the alert notification list can include system
administrators, mission or business owners, system owners, information owners/stewards,
senior agency information security officers, senior agency officials for privacy, system
security officers, or privacy officers. In contrast to alerts generated by the system, alerts
generated by organizations in SI-4(12) focus on information sources external to the system,
such as suspicious activity reports and reports on potential insider threats
SYSTEM MONITORING | AUTOMATED RESPONSE TO SUSPICIOUS EVENTS
(a) Notify [Assignment: organization-defined incident response personnel (identified by
name and/or by role)] of detected suspicious events; and
(b) Take the following actions upon detection: [Assignment: organization-defined leastdisruptive actions to terminate suspicious events].
Discussion: Least-disruptive actions include initiating requests for human responses.
SYSTEM MONITORING | TESTING OF MONITORING TOOLS AND MECHANISMS
Test intrusion-monitoring tools and mechanisms [Assignment: organization-defined
frequency].
Discussion: Testing intrusion-monitoring tools and mechanisms is necessary to ensure that
the tools and mechanisms are operating correctly and continue to satisfy the monitoring
objectives of organizations. The frequency and depth of testing depends on the types of
tools and mechanisms used by organizations and the methods of deployment
) SYSTEM MONITORING | VISIBILITY OF ENCRYPTED COMMUNICATIONS
Make provisions so that [Assignment: organization-defined encrypted communications
traffic] is visible to [Assignment: organization-defined system monitoring tools and
mechanisms].
Discussion: Organizations balance the need to encrypt communications traffic to protect
data confidentiality with the need to maintain visibility into such traffic from a monitoring
perspective. Organizations determine whether the visibility requirement applies to internal
encrypted traffic, encrypted traffic intended for external destinations, or a subset of the
traffic types.
SYSTEM MONITORING | ANALYZE COMMUNICATIONS TRAFFIC ANOMALIES
Analyze outbound communications traffic at the external interfaces to the system and
selected [Assignment: organization-defined interior points within the system] to discover
anomalies.
Discussion: Organization-defined interior points include subnetworks and subsystems.
Anomalies within organizational systems include large file transfers, long-time persistent
connections, attempts to access information from unexpected locations, the use of unusual
protocols and ports, the use of unmonitored network protocols (e.g., IPv6 usage during IPv4
transition), and attempted communications with suspected malicious external addresses.
SYSTEM MONITORING | AUTOMATED ORGANIZATION-GENERATED ALERTS
Alert [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles] using [Assignment:
organization-defined automated mechanisms] when the following indications of
inappropriate or unusual activities with security or privacy implications occur:
[Assignment: organization-defined activities that trigger alerts].
Discussion: Organizational personnel on the system alert notification list include system
administrators, mission or business owners, system owners, senior agency information
security officer, senior agency official for privacy, system security officers, or privacy officers.
Automated organization-generated alerts are the security alerts generated by organizations
and transmitted using automated means. The sources for organization-generated alerts are
focused on other entities such as suspicious activity reports and reports on potential insider
threats. In contrast to alerts generated by the organization, alerts generated by the system
in SI-4(5) focus on information sources that are internal to the systems, such as audit
records.
SYSTEM MONITORING | ANALYZE TRAFFIC AND EVENT PATTERNS
(a) Analyze communications traffic and event patterns for the system;
(b) Develop profiles representing common traffic and event patterns; and
(c) Use the traffic and event profiles in tuning system-monitoring devices.
Discussion: Identifying and understanding common communications traffic and event
patterns help organizations provide useful information to system monitoring devices to
more effectively identify suspicious or anomalous traffic and events when they occur. Such
information can help reduce the number of false positives and false negatives during system
monitoring.
SYSTEM MONITORING | WIRELESS INTRUSION DETECTION
Employ a wireless intrusion detection system to identify rogue wireless devices and to
detect attack attempts and potential compromises or breaches to the system.
Discussion: Wireless signals may radiate beyond organizational facilities. Organizations
proactively search for unauthorized wireless connections, including the conduct of thorough
scans for unauthorized wireless access points. Wireless scans are not limited to those areas
within facilities containing systems but also include areas outside of facilities to verify that
unauthorized wireless access points are not connected to organizational systems
SYSTEM MONITORING | WIRELESS TO WIRELINE COMMUNICATIONS
Employ an intrusion detection system to monitor wireless communications traffic as the
traffic passes from wireless to wireline networks.
Discussion: Wireless networks are inherently less secure than wired networks. For example,
wireless networks are more susceptible to eavesdroppers or traffic analysis than wireline
networks. When wireless to wireline communications exist, the wireless network could
become a port of entry into the wired network. Given the greater facility of unauthorized
network access via wireless access points compared to unauthorized wired network access
from within the physical boundaries of the system, additional monitoring of transitioning
traffic between wireless and wired networks may be necessary to detect malicious activities.
Employing intrusion detection systems to monitor wireless communications traffic helps to
ensure that the traffic does not contain malicious code prior to transitioning to the wireline
network.
SYSTEM MONITORING | CORRELATE MONITORING INFORMATION
Correlate information from monitoring tools and mechanisms employed throughout the
system.
Discussion: Correlating information from different system monitoring tools and mechanisms
can provide a more comprehensive view of system activity. Correlating system monitoring
tools and mechanisms that typically work in isolation—including malicious code protection
software, host monitoring, and network monitoring—can provide an organization-wide
monitoring view and may reveal otherwise unseen attack patterns. Understanding the
capabilities and limitations of diverse monitoring tools and mechanisms and how to
maximize the use of information generated by those tools and mechanisms can help
organizations develop, operate, and maintain effective monitoring programs. The correlation
of monitoring information is especially important during the transition from older to newer
technologies (e.g., transitioning from IPv4 to IPv6 network protocols).
SYSTEM MONITORING | INTEGRATED SITUATIONAL AWARENESS
Correlate information from monitoring physical, cyber, and supply chain activities to
achieve integrated, organization-wide situational awareness.
Discussion: Correlating monitoring information from a more diverse set of information
sources helps to achieve integrated situational awareness. Integrated situational awareness
from a combination of physical, cyber, and supply chain monitoring activities enhances the
capability of organizations to more quickly detect sophisticated attacks and investigate the
methods and techniques employed to carry out such attacks. In contrast to SI-4(16), which
correlates the various cyber monitoring information, integrated situational awareness is
intended to correlate monitoring beyond the cyber domain. Correlation of monitoring
information from multiple activities may help reveal attacks on organizations that are
operating across multiple attack vectors
SYSTEM MONITORING | ANALYZE TRAFFIC AND COVERT EXFILTRATION
Analyze outbound communications traffic at external interfaces to the system and at the
following interior points to detect covert exfiltration of information: [Assignment:
organization-defined interior points within the system].
Discussion: Organization-defined interior points include subnetworks and subsystems.
Covert means that can be used to exfiltrate information include steganography.
SYSTEM MONITORING | RISK FOR INDIVIDUALS
Implement [Assignment: organization-defined additional monitoring] of individuals who
have been identified by [Assignment: organization-defined sources] as posing an increased
level of risk.
Discussion: Indications of increased risk from individuals can be obtained from different
sources, including personnel records, intelligence agencies, law enforcement organizations,
and other sources. The monitoring of individuals is coordinated with the management, legal,
security, privacy, and human resource officials who conduct such monitoring. Monitoring is
conducted in accordance with applicable laws, executive orders, directives, regulations,
policies, standards, and guidelines.
) SYSTEM MONITORING | PRIVILEGED USERS
Implement the following additional monitoring of privileged users: [Assignment:
organization-defined additional monitoring].
Discussion: Privileged users have access to more sensitive information, including securityrelated information, than the general user population. Access to such information means
that privileged users can potentially do greater damage to systems and organizations than
non-privileged users. Therefore, implementing additional monitoring on privileged users
helps to ensure that organizations can identify malicious activity at the earliest possible time
and take appropriate actions
SYSTEM MONITORING | PROBATIONARY PERIODS
Implement the following additional monitoring of individuals during [Assignment:
organization-defined probationary period]: [Assignment: organization-defined additional
monitoring].
Discussion: During probationary periods, employees do not have permanent employment
status within organizations. Without such status or access to information that is resident on
the system, additional monitoring can help identify any potentially malicious activity or
inappropriate behavior.
SYSTEM MONITORING | UNAUTHORIZED NETWORK SERVICES
(a) Detect network services that have not been authorized or approved by [Assignment:
organization-defined authorization or approval processes]; and
(b) [Selection (one or more): Audit; Alert [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or
roles]] when detected.
Discussion: Unauthorized or unapproved network services include services in serviceoriented architectures that lack organizational verification or validation and may therefore
be unreliable or serve as malicious rogues for valid services.
SYSTEM MONITORING | HOST-BASED DEVICES
Implement the following host-based monitoring mechanisms at [Assignment:
organization-defined system components]: [Assignment: organization-defined host-based
monitoring mechanisms].
Discussion: Host-based monitoring collects information about the host (or system in which it
resides). System components in which host-based monitoring can be implemented include
servers, notebook computers, and mobile devices. Organizations may consider employing
host-based monitoring mechanisms from multiple product developers or vendors.
) SYSTEM MONITORING | INDICATORS OF COMPROMISE
Discover, collect, and distribute to [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles],
indicators of compromise provided by [Assignment: organization-defined sources].
Discussion: Indicators of compromise (IOC) are forensic artifacts from intrusions that are
identified on organizational systems at the host or network level. IOCs provide valuable
information on systems that have been compromised. IOCs can include the creation of
registry key values. IOCs for network traffic include Universal Resource Locator or protocol
elements that indicate malicious code command and control servers. The rapid distribution
and adoption of IOCs can improve information security by reducing the time that systems
and organizations are vulnerable to the same exploit or attack. Threat indicators, signatures,
tactics, techniques, procedures, and other indicators of compromise may be available via
government and non-government cooperatives, including the Forum of Incident Response
and Security Teams, the United States Computer Emergency Readiness Team, the Defense
Industrial Base Cybersecurity Information Sharing Program, and the CERT Coordination
Center
) SYSTEM MONITORING | OPTIMIZE NETWORK TRAFFIC ANALYSIS
Provide visibility into network traffic at external and key internal system interfaces to
optimize the effectiveness of monitoring devices.
Discussion: Encrypted traffic, asymmetric routing architectures, capacity and latency
limitations, and transitioning from older to newer technologies (e.g., IPv4 to IPv6 network
protocol transition) may result in blind spots for organizations when analyzing network
traffic. Collecting, decrypting, pre-processing, and distributing only relevant traffic to
monitoring devices can streamline the efficiency and use of devices and optimize traffic
analysis.