DE.AE-3: Event data are collected and correlated from multiple sources and sensors
AUDIT RECORD REVIEW, ANALYSIS, AND REPORTING
Control:
a. Review and analyze system audit records [Assignment: organization-defined frequency] for
indications of [Assignment: organization-defined inappropriate or unusual activity] and the
potential impact of the inappropriate or unusual activity;
b. Report findings to [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles]; and
c. Adjust the level of audit record review, analysis, and reporting within the system when there
is a change in risk based on law enforcement information, intelligence information, or other
credible sources of information.
Discussion: Audit record review, analysis, and reporting covers information security- and privacyrelated logging performed by organizations, including logging that results from the monitoring of
account usage, remote access, wireless connectivity, mobile device connection, configuration
settings, system component inventory, use of maintenance tools and non-local maintenance,
physical access, temperature and humidity, equipment delivery and removal, communications at
system interfaces, and use of mobile code or Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP). Findings can be
reported to organizational entities that include the incident response team, help desk, and
security or privacy offices. If organizations are prohibited from reviewing and analyzing audit
records or unable to conduct such activities, the review or analysis may be carried out by other
organizations granted such authority. The frequency, scope, and/or depth of the audit record
review, analysis, and reporting may be adjusted to meet organizational needs based on new
information received.
AUDIT RECORD REVIEW, ANALYSIS, AND REPORTING | AUTOMATED PROCESS INTEGRATION
Integrate audit record review, analysis, and reporting processes using [Assignment:
organization-defined automated mechanisms].
Discussion: Organizational processes that benefit from integrated audit record review,
analysis, and reporting include incident response, continuous monitoring, contingency
planning, investigation and response to suspicious activities, and Inspector General audits.
AUDIT RECORD REVIEW, ANALYSIS, AND REPORTING | CORRELATE AUDIT RECORD REPOSITORIES
Analyze and correlate audit records across different repositories to gain organization-wide
situational awareness.
Discussion: Organization-wide situational awareness includes awareness across all three
levels of risk management (i.e., organizational level, mission/business process level, and
information system level) and supports cross-organization awareness.
) AUDIT RECORD REVIEW, ANALYSIS, AND REPORTING | CENTRAL REVIEW AND ANALYSIS
Provide and implement the capability to centrally review and analyze audit records from
multiple components within the system.
Discussion: Automated mechanisms for centralized reviews and analyses include Security
Information and Event Management products.
AUDIT RECORD REVIEW, ANALYSIS, AND REPORTING | INTEGRATED ANALYSIS OF AUDIT RECORDS
Integrate analysis of audit records with analysis of [Selection (one or more): vulnerability
scanning information; performance data; system monitoring information; [Assignment:
organization-defined data/information collected from other sources]] to further enhance
the ability to identify inappropriate or unusual activity.
Discussion: Integrated analysis of audit records does not require vulnerability scanning, the
generation of performance data, or system monitoring. Rather, integrated analysis requires
that the analysis of information generated by scanning, monitoring, or other data collection
activities is integrated with the analysis of audit record information. Security Information
and Event Management tools can facilitate audit record aggregation or consolidation from
multiple system components as well as audit record correlation and analysis. The use of
standardized audit record analysis scripts developed by organizations (with localized script
adjustments, as necessary) provides more cost-effective approaches for analyzing audit
record information collected. The correlation of audit record information with vulnerability
scanning information is important in determining the veracity of vulnerability scans of the
system and in correlating attack detection events with scanning results. Correlation with
performance data can uncover denial-of-service attacks or other types of attacks that result
in the unauthorized use of resources. Correlation with system monitoring information can
assist in uncovering attacks and in better relating audit information to operational situations
AUDIT RECORD REVIEW, ANALYSIS, AND REPORTING | CORRELATION WITH PHYSICAL MONITORING
Correlate information from audit records with information obtained from monitoring
physical access to further enhance the ability to identify suspicious, inappropriate,
unusual, or malevolent activity.
Discussion: The correlation of physical audit record information and the audit records from
systems may assist organizations in identifying suspicious behavior or supporting evidence of
such behavior. For example, the correlation of an individual’s identity for logical access to
certain systems with the additional physical security information that the individual was
present at the facility when the logical access occurred may be useful in investigations.
AUDIT RECORD REVIEW, ANALYSIS, AND REPORTING | PERMITTED ACTIONS
Specify the permitted actions for each [Selection (one or more): system process; role; user]
associated with the review, analysis, and reporting of audit record information.
Discussion: Organizations specify permitted actions for system processes, roles, and users
associated with the review, analysis, and reporting of audit records through system account
management activities. Specifying permitted actions on audit record information is a way to
enforce the principle of least privilege. Permitted actions are enforced by the system and
include read, write, execute, append, and delete
AUDIT RECORD REVIEW, ANALYSIS, AND REPORTING | FULL TEXT ANALYSIS OF PRIVILEGED
COMMANDS
Perform a full text analysis of logged privileged commands in a physically distinct
component or subsystem of the system, or other system that is dedicated to that analysis.
Discussion: Full text analysis of privileged commands requires a distinct environment for the
analysis of audit record information related to privileged users without compromising such
information on the system where the users have elevated privileges, including the capability
to execute privileged commands. Full text analysis refers to analysis that considers the full
text of privileged commands (i.e., commands and parameters) as opposed to analysis that
considers only the name of the command. Full text analysis includes the use of pattern
matching and heuristics.
AUDIT RECORD REVIEW, ANALYSIS, AND REPORTING | CORRELATION WITH INFORMATION FROM
NONTECHNICAL SOURCES
Correlate information from nontechnical sources with audit record information to enhance
organization-wide situational awareness.
Discussion: Nontechnical sources include records that document organizational policy
violations related to harassment incidents and the improper use of information assets. Such
information can lead to a directed analytical effort to detect potential malicious insider
activity. Organizations limit access to information that is available from nontechnical sources
due to its sensitive nature. Limited access minimizes the potential for inadvertent release of
privacy-related information to individuals who do not have a need to know. The correlation
of information from nontechnical sources with audit record information generally occurs
only when individuals are suspected of being involved in an incident. Organizations obtain
legal advice prior to initiating such actions.
CONTINUOUS MONITORING
Control: Develop a system-level continuous monitoring strategy and implement continuous
monitoring in accordance with the organization-level continuous monitoring strategy that
includes:
a. Establishing the following system-level metrics to be monitored: [Assignment: organizationdefined system-level metrics];
b. Establishing [Assignment: organization-defined frequencies] for monitoring and
[Assignment: organization-defined frequencies] for assessment of control effectiveness;
c. Ongoing control assessments in accordance with the continuous monitoring strategy;
d. Ongoing monitoring of system and organization-defined metrics in accordance with the
continuous monitoring strategy;
e. Correlation and analysis of information generated by control assessments and monitoring;
f. Response actions to address results of the analysis of control assessment and monitoring
information; and
g. Reporting the security and privacy status of the system to [Assignment: organizationdefined personnel or roles] [Assignment: organization-defined frequency].
Discussion: Continuous monitoring at the system level facilitates ongoing awareness of the
system security and privacy posture to support organizational risk management decisions. The
terms “continuous” and “ongoing” imply that organizations assess and monitor their controls
and risks at a frequency sufficient to support risk-based decisions. Different types of controls may
require different monitoring frequencies. The results of continuous monitoring generate risk
response actions by organizations. When monitoring the effectiveness of multiple controls that
have been grouped into capabilities, a root-cause analysis may be needed to determine the
specific control that has failed. Continuous monitoring programs allow organizations to maintain
the authorizations of systems and common controls in highly dynamic environments of operation
with changing mission and business needs, threats, vulnerabilities, and technologies. Having
access to security and privacy information on a continuing basis through reports and dashboards
gives organizational officials the ability to make effective and timely risk management decisions,
including ongoing authorization decisions.
Automation supports more frequent updates to hardware, software, and firmware inventories,
authorization packages, and other system information. Effectiveness is further enhanced when
continuous monitoring outputs are formatted to provide information that is specific, measurable,
actionable, relevant, and timely. Continuous monitoring activities are scaled in accordance with
the security categories of systems. Monitoring requirements, including the need for specific
monitoring, may be referenced in other controls and control enhancements
CONTINUOUS MONITORING | INDEPENDENT ASSESSMENT
Employ independent assessors or assessment teams to monitor the controls in the system
on an ongoing basis.
Discussion: Organizations maximize the value of control assessments by requiring that
assessments be conducted by assessors with appropriate levels of independence. The level
of required independence is based on organizational continuous monitoring strategies.
Assessor independence provides a degree of impartiality to the monitoring process. To
achieve such impartiality, assessors do not create a mutual or conflicting interest with the
organizations where the assessments are being conducted, assess their own work, act as
management or employees of the organizations they are serving, or place themselves in
advocacy positions for the organizations acquiring their services.
CONTINUOUS MONITORING | TREND ANALYSES
Employ trend analyses to determine if control implementations, the frequency of
continuous monitoring activities, and the types of activities used in the continuous
monitoring process need to be modified based on empirical data.
Discussion: Trend analyses include examining recent threat information that addresses the
types of threat events that have occurred in the organization or the Federal Government,
success rates of certain types of attacks, emerging vulnerabilities in technologies, evolving
social engineering techniques, the effectiveness of configuration settings, results from
multiple control assessments, and findings from Inspectors General or auditors.
CONTINUOUS MONITORING | RISK MONITORING
Ensure risk monitoring is an integral part of the continuous monitoring strategy that
includes the following:
(a) Effectiveness monitoring;
(b) Compliance monitoring; and
(c) Change monitoring.
Discussion: Risk monitoring is informed by the established organizational risk tolerance.
Effectiveness monitoring determines the ongoing effectiveness of the implemented risk
response measures. Compliance monitoring verifies that required risk response measures
are implemented. It also verifies that security and privacy requirements are satisfied. Change
monitoring identifies changes to organizational systems and environments of operation that
may affect security and privacy risk.
CONTINUOUS MONITORING | CONSISTENCY ANALYSIS
Employ the following actions to validate that policies are established and implemented
controls are operating in a consistent manner: [Assignment: organization-defined actions].
Discussion: Security and privacy controls are often added incrementally to a system. As a
result, policies for selecting and implementing controls may be inconsistent, and the controls
could fail to work together in a consistent or coordinated manner. At a minimum, the lack of
consistency and coordination could mean that there are unacceptable security and privacy
gaps in the system. At worst, it could mean that some of the controls implemented in one
location or by one component are actually impeding the functionality of other controls (e.g.,
encrypting internal network traffic can impede monitoring). In other situations, failing to
consistently monitor all implemented network protocols (e.g., a dual stack of IPv4 and IPv6)
may create unintended vulnerabilities in the system that could be exploited by adversaries.
It is important to validate—through testing, monitoring, and analysis—that the implemented
controls are operating in a consistent, coordinated, non-interfering manner.
CONTINUOUS MONITORING | AUTOMATION SUPPORT FOR MONITORING
Ensure the accuracy, currency, and availability of monitoring results for the system using
[Assignment: organization-defined automated mechanisms].
Discussion: Using automated tools for monitoring helps to maintain the accuracy, currency,
and availability of monitoring information which in turns helps to increase the level of
ongoing awareness of the system security and privacy posture in support of organizational
risk management decisions
INCIDENT HANDLING
Control:
a. Implement an incident handling capability for incidents that is consistent with the incident
response plan and includes preparation, detection and analysis, containment, eradication,
and recovery;
b. Coordinate incident handling activities with contingency planning activities;
c. Incorporate lessons learned from ongoing incident handling activities into incident response
procedures, training, and testing, and implement the resulting changes accordingly; and
d. Ensure the rigor, intensity, scope, and results of incident handling activities are comparable
and predictable across the organization.
Discussion: Organizations recognize that incident response capabilities are dependent on the
capabilities of organizational systems and the mission and business processes being supported by
those systems. Organizations consider incident response as part of the definition, design, and
development of mission and business processes and systems. Incident-related information can
be obtained from a variety of sources, including audit monitoring, physical access monitoring,
and network monitoring; user or administrator reports; and reported supply chain events. An
effective incident handling capability includes coordination among many organizational entities
(e.g., mission or business owners, system owners, authorizing officials, human resources offices,
physical security offices, personnel security offices, legal departments, risk executive [function],
operations personnel, procurement offices). Suspected security incidents include the receipt of
suspicious email communications that can contain malicious code. Suspected supply chain
incidents include the insertion of counterfeit hardware or malicious code into organizational
systems or system components. For federal agencies, an incident that involves personally
identifiable information is considered a breach. A breach results in unauthorized disclosure, the
loss of control, unauthorized acquisition, compromise, or a similar occurrence where a person
other than an authorized user accesses or potentially accesses personally identifiable
information or an authorized user accesses or potentially accesses such information for other
than authorized purposes.
) INCIDENT HANDLING | AUTOMATED INCIDENT HANDLING PROCESSES
Support the incident handling process using [Assignment: organization-defined automated
mechanisms].
Discussion: Automated mechanisms that support incident handling processes include online
incident management systems and tools that support the collection of live response data,
full network packet capture, and forensic analysis.
INCIDENT HANDLING | DYNAMIC RECONFIGURATION
Include the following types of dynamic reconfiguration for [Assignment: organizationdefined system components] as part of the incident response capability: [Assignment:
organization-defined types of dynamic reconfiguration].
Discussion: Dynamic reconfiguration includes changes to router rules, access control lists,
intrusion detection or prevention system parameters, and filter rules for guards or firewalls.
Organizations may perform dynamic reconfiguration of systems to stop attacks, misdirect
attackers, and isolate components of systems, thus limiting the extent of the damage from
breaches or compromises. Organizations include specific time frames for achieving the
reconfiguration of systems in the definition of the reconfiguration capability, considering the
potential need for rapid response to effectively address cyber threats.
INCIDENT HANDLING | CONTINUITY OF OPERATIONS
Identify [Assignment: organization-defined classes of incidents] and take the following
actions in response to those incidents to ensure continuation of organizational mission and
business functions: [Assignment: organization-defined actions to take in response to
classes of incidents].
Discussion: Classes of incidents include malfunctions due to design or implementation
errors and omissions, targeted malicious attacks, and untargeted malicious attacks. Incident
response actions include orderly system degradation, system shutdown, fall back to manual
mode or activation of alternative technology whereby the system operates differently,
employing deceptive measures, alternate information flows, or operating in a mode that is
reserved for when systems are under attack. Organizations consider whether continuity of
operations requirements during an incident conflict with the capability to automatically
disable the system as specified as part of IR-4(5)
INCIDENT HANDLING | INFORMATION CORRELATION
Correlate incident information and individual incident responses to achieve an
organization-wide perspective on incident awareness and response.
Discussion: Sometimes, a threat event, such as a hostile cyber-attack, can only be observed
by bringing together information from different sources, including various reports and
reporting procedures established by organizations.
INCIDENT HANDLING | AUTOMATIC DISABLING OF SYSTEM
Implement a configurable capability to automatically disable the system if [Assignment:
organization-defined security violations] are detected.
Discussion: Organizations consider whether the capability to automatically disable the
system conflicts with continuity of operations requirements specified as part of CP-2 or IR4(3). Security violations include cyber-attacks that have compromised the integrity of the
system or exfiltrated organizational information and serious errors in software programs
that could adversely impact organizational missions or functions or jeopardize the safety of
individuals.
INCIDENT HANDLING | INSIDER THREATS
Implement an incident handling capability for incidents involving insider threats.
Discussion: Explicit focus on handling incidents involving insider threats provides additional
emphasis on this type of threat and the need for specific incident handling capabilities to
provide appropriate and timely responses.
INCIDENT HANDLING | INSIDER THREATS — INTRA-ORGANIZATION COORDINATION
Coordinate an incident handling capability for insider threats that includes the following
organizational entities [Assignment: organization-defined entities].
Discussion: Incident handling for insider threat incidents (e.g., preparation, detection and
analysis, containment, eradication, and recovery) requires coordination among many
organizational entities, including mission or business owners, system owners, human
resources offices, procurement offices, personnel offices, physical security offices, senior
agency information security officer, operations personnel, risk executive (function), senior
agency official for privacy, and legal counsel. In addition, organizations may require external
support from federal, state, and local law enforcement agencies.
INCIDENT HANDLING | CORRELATION WITH EXTERNAL ORGANIZATIONS
Coordinate with [Assignment: organization-defined external organizations] to correlate
and share [Assignment: organization-defined incident information] to achieve a crossorganization perspective on incident awareness and more effective incident responses.
Discussion: The coordination of incident information with external organizations—including
mission or business partners, military or coalition partners, customers, and developers—can
provide significant benefits. Cross-organizational coordination can serve as an important risk
management capability. This capability allows organizations to leverage information from a
variety of sources to effectively respond to incidents and breaches that could potentially
affect the organization’s operations, assets, and individuals.
INCIDENT HANDLING | DYNAMIC RESPONSE CAPABILITY
Employ [Assignment: organization-defined dynamic response capabilities] to respond to
incidents.
Discussion: The dynamic response capability addresses the timely deployment of new or
replacement organizational capabilities in response to incidents. This includes capabilities
implemented at the mission and business process level and at the system level.
INCIDENT HANDLING | SUPPLY CHAIN COORDINATION
Coordinate incident handling activities involving supply chain events with other
organizations involved in the supply chain.
Discussion: Organizations involved in supply chain activities include product developers,
system integrators, manufacturers, packagers, assemblers, distributors, vendors, and
resellers. Supply chain incidents can occur anywhere through or to the supply chain and
include compromises or breaches that involve primary or sub-tier providers, information
technology products, system components, development processes or personnel, and
distribution processes or warehousing facilities. Organizations consider including processes
for protecting and sharing incident information in information exchange agreements and
their obligations for reporting incidents to government oversight bodies (e.g., Federal
Acquisition Security Council).
Discussion: An integrated incident response team is a team of experts that assesses,
documents, and responds to incidents so that organizational systems and networks can
recover quickly and implement the necessary controls to avoid future incidents. Incident
response team personnel include forensic and malicious code analysts, tool developers,
systems security and privacy engineers, and real-time operations personnel. The incident
handling capability includes performing rapid forensic preservation of evidence and analysis
of and response to intrusions. For some organizations, the incident response team can be a
cross-organizational entity.
An integrated incident response team facilitates information sharing and allows
organizational personnel (e.g., developers, implementers, and operators) to leverage team
knowledge of the threat and implement defensive measures that enable organizations to
deter intrusions more effectively. Moreover, integrated teams promote the rapid detection
of intrusions, the development of appropriate mitigations, and the deployment of effective
defensive measures. For example, when an intrusion is detected, the integrated team can
rapidly develop an appropriate response for operators to implement, correlate the new
incident with information on past intrusions, and augment ongoing cyber intelligence
development. Integrated incident response teams are better able to identify adversary
tactics, techniques, and procedures that are linked to the operations tempo or specific
mission and business functions and to define responsive actions in a way that does not
disrupt those mission and business functions. Incident response teams can be distributed
within organizations to make the capability resilient.
)INCIDENT HANDLING | MALICIOUS CODE AND FORENSIC ANALYSIS
Analyze malicious code and/or other residual artifacts remaining in the system after the
incident.
Discussion: When conducted carefully in an isolated environment, analysis of malicious code
and other residual artifacts of a security incident or breach can give the organization insight
into adversary tactics, techniques, and procedures. It can also indicate the identity or some
defining characteristics of the adversary. In addition, malicious code analysis can help the
organization develop responses to future incidents.
)INCIDENT HANDLING | BEHAVIOR ANALYSIS
Analyze anomalous or suspected adversarial behavior in or related to [Assignment:
organization-defined environments or resources].
Discussion: If the organization maintains a deception environment, an analysis of behaviors
in that environment, including resources targeted by the adversary and timing of the
incident or event, can provide insight into adversarial tactics, techniques, and procedures.
External to a deception environment, the analysis of anomalous adversarial behavior (e.g.,
changes in system performance or usage patterns) or suspected behavior (e.g., changes in
searches for the location of specific resources) can give the organization such insight.
)INCIDENT HANDLING | SECURITY OPERATIONS CENTER
Establish and maintain a security operations center.
Discussion: A security operations center (SOC) is the focal point for security operations and
computer network defense for an organization. The purpose of the SOC is to defend and
monitor an organization’s systems and networks (i.e., cyber infrastructure) on an ongoing
basis. The SOC is also responsible for detecting, analyzing, and responding to cybersecurity
incidents in a timely manner. The organization staffs the SOC with skilled technical and
operational personnel (e.g., security analysts, incident response personnel, systems security
engineers) and implements a combination of technical, management, and operational
controls (including monitoring, scanning, and forensics tools) to monitor, fuse, correlate,
analyze, and respond to threat and security-relevant event data from multiple sources.
These sources include perimeter defenses, network devices (e.g., routers, switches), and
endpoint agent data feeds. The SOC provides a holistic situational awareness capability to
help organizations determine the security posture of the system and organization. A SOC
capability can be obtained in a variety of ways. Larger organizations may implement a
dedicated SOC while smaller organizations may employ third-party organizations to provide
such a capability.
INCIDENT HANDLING | PUBLIC RELATIONS AND REPUTATION REPAIR
(a) Manage public relations associated with an incident; and
(b) Employ measures to repair the reputation of the organization.
Discussion: It is important for an organization to have a strategy in place for addressing
incidents that have been brought to the attention of the general public, have cast the
organization in a negative light, or have affected the organization’s constituents (e.g.,
partners, customers). Such publicity can be extremely harmful to the organization and affect
its ability to carry out its mission and business functions. Taking proactive steps to repair the
organization’s reputation is an essential aspect of reestablishing the trust and confidence of
its constituents.
INCIDENT MONITORING
Control: Track and document incidents.
Discussion: Documenting incidents includes maintaining records about each incident, the status
of the incident, and other pertinent information necessary for forensics as well as evaluating
incident details, trends, and handling. Incident information can be obtained from a variety of
sources, including network monitoring, incident reports, incident response teams, user
complaints, supply chain partners, audit monitoring, physical access monitoring, and user and
administrator reports. IR-4 provides information on the types of incidents that are appropriate
for monitoring
INCIDENT MONITORING | AUTOMATED TRACKING, DATA COLLECTION, AND ANALYSIS
Track incidents and collect and analyze incident information using [Assignment:
organization-defined automated mechanisms].
Discussion: Automated mechanisms for tracking incidents and collecting and analyzing
incident information include Computer Incident Response Centers or other electronic
databases of incidents and network monitoring devices.
INCIDENT RESPONSE PLAN
Control:
a. Develop an incident response plan that:
1. Provides the organization with a roadmap for implementing its incident response
capability;
2. Describes the structure and organization of the incident response capability;
3. Provides a high-level approach for how the incident response capability fits into the
overall organization;
4. Meets the unique requirements of the organization, which relate to mission, size,
structure, and functions;
5. Defines reportable incidents;
6. Provides metrics for measuring the incident response capability within the organization;
7. Defines the resources and management support needed to effectively maintain and
mature an incident response capability;
8. Addresses the sharing of incident information;
9. Is reviewed and approved by [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles]
[Assignment: organization-defined frequency]; and
10. Explicitly designates responsibility for incident response to [Assignment: organizationdefined entities, personnel, or roles].
b. Distribute copies of the incident response plan to [Assignment: organization-defined incident
response personnel (identified by name and/or by role) and organizational elements];
c. Update the incident response plan to address system and organizational changes or
problems encountered during plan implementation, execution, or testing;
d. Communicate incident response plan changes to [Assignment: organization-defined incident
response personnel (identified by name and/or by role) and organizational elements]; and
e. Protect the incident response plan from unauthorized disclosure and modification.
Discussion: It is important that organizations develop and implement a coordinated approach to
incident response. Organizational mission and business functions determine the structure of
incident response capabilities. As part of the incident response capabilities, organizations
consider the coordination and sharing of information with external organizations, including
external service providers and other organizations involved in the supply chain. For incidents
involving personally identifiable information (i.e., breaches), include a process to determine
whether notice to oversight organizations or affected individuals is appropriate and provide that
notice accordingly.
INCIDENT RESPONSE PLAN | BREACHES
Include the following in the Incident Response Plan for breaches involving personally
identifiable information:
(a) A process to determine if notice to individuals or other organizations, including
oversight organizations, is needed;
(b) An assessment process to determine the extent of the harm, embarrassment,
inconvenience, or unfairness to affected individuals and any mechanisms to mitigate
such harms; and
(c) Identification of applicable privacy requirements.
Discussion: Organizations may be required by law, regulation, or policy to follow specific
procedures relating to breaches, including notice to individuals, affected organizations, and
oversight bodies; standards of harm; and mitigation or other specific requirements.
SYSTEM MONITORING
Control:
a. Monitor the system to detect:
1. Attacks and indicators of potential attacks in accordance with the following monitoring
objectives: [Assignment: organization-defined monitoring objectives]; and
2. Unauthorized local, network, and remote connections;
b. Identify unauthorized use of the system through the following techniques and methods:
[Assignment: organization-defined techniques and methods];
c. Invoke internal monitoring capabilities or deploy monitoring devices:
1. Strategically within the system to collect organization-determined essential information;
and
2. At ad hoc locations within the system to track specific types of transactions of interest
to the organization;
d. Analyze detected events and anomalies;
e. Adjust the level of system monitoring activity when there is a change in risk to organizational
operations and assets, individuals, other organizations, or the Nation;
f. Obtain legal opinion regarding system monitoring activities; and
g. Provide [Assignment: organization-defined system monitoring information] to [Assignment:
organization-defined personnel or roles] [Selection (one or more): as needed; [Assignment:
organization-defined frequency]].
Discussion: System monitoring includes external and internal monitoring. External monitoring
includes the observation of events occurring at external interfaces to the system. Internal
monitoring includes the observation of events occurring within the system. Organizations
monitor systems by observing audit activities in real time or by observing other system aspects
such as access patterns, characteristics of access, and other actions. The monitoring objectives
guide and inform the determination of the events. System monitoring capabilities are achieved
through a variety of tools and techniques, including intrusion detection and prevention systems,
malicious code protection software, scanning tools, audit record monitoring software, and
network monitoring software.
Depending on the security architecture, the distribution and configuration of monitoring devices
may impact throughput at key internal and external boundaries as well as at other locations
across a network due to the introduction of network throughput latency. If throughput
management is needed, such devices are strategically located and deployed as part of an
established organization-wide security architecture. Strategic locations for monitoring devices
include selected perimeter locations and near key servers and server farms that support critical
applications. Monitoring devices are typically employed at the managed interfaces associated
with controls SC-7 and AC-17. The information collected is a function of the organizational
monitoring objectives and the capability of systems to support such objectives. Specific types of
transactions of interest include Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) traffic that bypasses HTTP
proxies. System monitoring is an integral part of organizational continuous monitoring and
incident response programs, and output from system monitoring serves as input to those
programs. System monitoring requirements, including the need for specific types of system
monitoring, may be referenced in other controls
Adjustments to levels of system monitoring are based on law enforcement information,
intelligence information, or other sources of information. The legality of system monitoring
activities is based on applicable laws, executive orders, directives, regulations, policies,
standards, and guidelines.
SYSTEM MONITORING | SYSTEM-WIDE INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM
Connect and configure individual intrusion detection tools into a system-wide intrusion
detection system.
Discussion: Linking individual intrusion detection tools into a system-wide intrusion
detection system provides additional coverage and effective detection capabilities. The
information contained in one intrusion detection tool can be shared widely across the
organization, making the system-wide detection capability more robust and powerful.
SYSTEM MONITORING | AUTOMATED TOOLS AND MECHANISMS FOR REAL-TIME ANALYSIS
Employ automated tools and mechanisms to support near real-time analysis of events.
Discussion: Automated tools and mechanisms include host-based, network-based,
transport-based, or storage-based event monitoring tools and mechanisms or security
information and event management (SIEM) technologies that provide real-time analysis of
alerts and notifications generated by organizational systems. Automated monitoring
techniques can create unintended privacy risks because automated controls may connect to
external or otherwise unrelated systems. The matching of records between these systems
may create linkages with unintended consequences. Organizations assess and document
these risks in their privacy impact assessment and make determinations that are in
alignment with their privacy program plan
SYSTEM MONITORING | AUTOMATED TOOL AND MECHANISM INTEGRATION
Employ automated tools and mechanisms to integrate intrusion detection tools and
mechanisms into access control and flow control mechanisms.
Discussion: Using automated tools and mechanisms to integrate intrusion detection tools
and mechanisms into access and flow control mechanisms facilitates a rapid response to
attacks by enabling the reconfiguration of mechanisms in support of attack isolation and
elimination.
SYSTEM MONITORING | INBOUND AND OUTBOUND COMMUNICATIONS TRAFFIC
(a) Determine criteria for unusual or unauthorized activities or conditions for inbound
and outbound communications traffic;
(b) Monitor inbound and outbound communications traffic [Assignment: organizationdefined frequency] for [Assignment: organization-defined unusual or unauthorized
activities or conditions].
Discussion: Unusual or unauthorized activities or conditions related to system inbound and
outbound communications traffic includes internal traffic that indicates the presence of
malicious code or unauthorized use of legitimate code or credentials within organizational
systems or propagating among system components, signaling to external systems, and the
unauthorized exporting of information. Evidence of malicious code or unauthorized use of
legitimate code or credentials is used to identify potentially compromised systems or system
components.
SYSTEM MONITORING | SYSTEM-GENERATED ALERTS
Alert [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles] when the following systemgenerated indications of compromise or potential compromise occur: [Assignment:
organization-defined compromise indicators].
Discussion: Alerts may be generated from a variety of sources, including audit records or
inputs from malicious code protection mechanisms, intrusion detection or prevention
mechanisms, or boundary protection devices such as firewalls, gateways, and routers. Alerts
can be automated and may be transmitted telephonically, by electronic mail messages, or by
text messaging. Organizational personnel on the alert notification list can include system
administrators, mission or business owners, system owners, information owners/stewards,
senior agency information security officers, senior agency officials for privacy, system
security officers, or privacy officers. In contrast to alerts generated by the system, alerts
generated by organizations in SI-4(12) focus on information sources external to the system,
such as suspicious activity reports and reports on potential insider threats.
SYSTEM MONITORING | AUTOMATED RESPONSE TO SUSPICIOUS EVENTS
(a) Notify [Assignment: organization-defined incident response personnel (identified by
name and/or by role)] of detected suspicious events; and
(b) Take the following actions upon detection: [Assignment: organization-defined leastdisruptive actions to terminate suspicious events].
Discussion: Least-disruptive actions include initiating requests for human responses