PR.IP-5: Policy and regulations regarding the physical operating environment for organizational assets are met
EMERGENCY SHUTOFF
Control:
a. Provide the capability of shutting off power to [Assignment: organization-defined system or
individual system components] in emergency situations;
b. Place emergency shutoff switches or devices in [Assignment: organization-defined location
by system or system component] to facilitate access for authorized personnel; and
c. Protect emergency power shutoff capability from unauthorized activation.
Discussion: Emergency power shutoff primarily applies to organizational facilities that contain
concentrations of system resources, including data centers, mainframe computer rooms, server
rooms, and areas with computer-controlled machinery.
EMERGENCY LIGHTING
Control: Employ and maintain automatic emergency lighting for the system that activates in the
event of a power outage or disruption and that covers emergency exits and evacuation routes
within the facility.
Discussion: The provision of emergency lighting applies primarily to organizational facilities that
contain concentrations of system resources, including data centers, server rooms, and
mainframe computer rooms. Emergency lighting provisions for the system are described in the
contingency plan for the organization. If emergency lighting for the system fails or cannot be
provided, organizations consider alternate processing sites for power-related contingencies.
EMERGENCY LIGHTING | ESSENTIAL MISSION AND BUSINESS FUNCTIONS
Provide emergency lighting for all areas within the facility supporting essential mission and
business functions.
Discussion: Organizations define their essential missions and functions
FIRE PROTECTION
Control: Employ and maintain fire detection and suppression systems that are supported by an
independent energy source.
Discussion: The provision of fire detection and suppression systems applies primarily to
organizational facilities that contain concentrations of system resources, including data centers,
server rooms, and mainframe computer rooms. Fire detection and suppression systems that may
require an independent energy source include sprinkler systems and smoke detectors. An
independent energy source is an energy source, such as a microgrid, that is separate, or can be
separated, from the energy sources providing power for the other parts of the facility.
FIRE PROTECTION | DETECTION SYSTEMS — AUTOMATIC ACTIVATION AND NOTIFICATION
Employ fire detection systems that activate automatically and notify [Assignment:
organization-defined personnel or roles] and [Assignment: organization-defined
emergency responders] in the event of a fire.
Discussion: Organizations can identify personnel, roles, and emergency responders if
individuals on the notification list need to have access authorizations or clearances (e.g., to
enter to facilities where access is restricted due to the classification or impact level of
information within the facility). Notification mechanisms may require independent energy
sources to ensure that the notification capability is not adversely affected by the fire.
FIRE PROTECTION | SUPPRESSION SYSTEMS — AUTOMATIC ACTIVATION AND NOTIFICATION
(a) Employ fire suppression systems that activate automatically and notify [Assignment:
organization-defined personnel or roles] and [Assignment: organization-defined
emergency responders]; and
(b) Employ an automatic fire suppression capability when the facility is not staffed on a
continuous basis.
Discussion: Organizations can identify specific personnel, roles, and emergency responders
if individuals on the notification list need to have appropriate access authorizations and/or
clearances (e.g., to enter to facilities where access is restricted due to the impact level or
classification of information within the facility). Notification mechanisms may require
independent energy sources to ensure that the notification capability is not adversely
affected by the fire.
FIRE PROTECTION | INSPECTIONS
Ensure that the facility undergoes [Assignment: organization-defined frequency] fire
protection inspections by authorized and qualified inspectors and identified deficiencies
are resolved within [Assignment: organization-defined time period].
Discussion: Authorized and qualified personnel within the jurisdiction of the organization
include state, county, and city fire inspectors and fire marshals. Organizations provide
escorts during inspections in situations where the systems that reside within the facilities
contain sensitive information.
ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROLS
Control:
a. Maintain [Selection (one or more): temperature; humidity; pressure; radiation; [Assignment:
organization-defined environmental control]] levels within the facility where the system
resides at [Assignment: organization-defined acceptable levels]; and
b. Monitor environmental control levels [Assignment: organization-defined frequency].
Discussion: The provision of environmental controls applies primarily to organizational facilities
that contain concentrations of system resources (e.g., data centers, mainframe computer rooms,
and server rooms). Insufficient environmental controls, especially in very harsh environments,
can have a significant adverse impact on the availability of systems and system components that
are needed to support organizational mission and business functions.
ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROLS | AUTOMATIC CONTROLS
Employ the following automatic environmental controls in the facility to prevent
fluctuations potentially harmful to the system: [Assignment: organization-defined
automatic environmental controls].
Discussion: The implementation of automatic environmental controls provides an
immediate response to environmental conditions that can damage, degrade, or destroy
organizational systems or systems components
ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROLS | MONITORING WITH ALARMS AND NOTIFICATIONS
Employ environmental control monitoring that provides an alarm or notification of
changes potentially harmful to personnel or equipment to [Assignment: organizationdefined personnel or roles].
Discussion: The alarm or notification may be an audible alarm or a visual message in real
time to personnel or roles defined by the organization. Such alarms and notifications can
help minimize harm to individuals and damage to organizational assets by facilitating a
timely incident response.
WATER DAMAGE PROTECTION
Control: Protect the system from damage resulting from water leakage by providing master
shutoff or isolation valves that are accessible, working properly, and known to key personnel.
Discussion: The provision of water damage protection primarily applies to organizational
facilities that contain concentrations of system resources, including data centers, server rooms,
and mainframe computer rooms. Isolation valves can be employed in addition to or in lieu of
master shutoff valves to shut off water supplies in specific areas of concern without affecting
entire organizations
WATER DAMAGE PROTECTION | AUTOMATION SUPPORT
Detect the presence of water near the system and alert [Assignment: organization-defined
personnel or roles] using [Assignment: organization-defined automated mechanisms].
Discussion: Automated mechanisms include notification systems, water detection sensors,
and alarms
LOCATION OF SYSTEM COMPONENTS
Control: Position system components within the facility to minimize potential damage from
[Assignment: organization-defined physical and environmental hazards] and to minimize the
opportunity for unauthorized access.
Discussion: Physical and environmental hazards include floods, fires, tornadoes, earthquakes,
hurricanes, terrorism, vandalism, an electromagnetic pulse, electrical interference, and other
forms of incoming electromagnetic radiation. Organizations consider the location of entry points
where unauthorized individuals, while not being granted access, might nonetheless be near
systems. Such proximity can increase the risk of unauthorized access to organizational
communications using wireless packet sniffers or microphones, or unauthorized disclosure of
information.