PR.IP-10: Response and recovery plans are tested
CONTINGENCY PLAN TESTING
Control:
a. Test the contingency plan for the system [Assignment: organization-defined frequency] using
the following tests to determine the effectiveness of the plan and the readiness to execute
the plan: [Assignment: organization-defined tests].
b. Review the contingency plan test results; and
Initiate corrective actions, if needed.
Discussion: Methods for testing contingency plans to determine the effectiveness of the plans
and identify potential weaknesses include checklists, walk-through and tabletop exercises,
simulations (parallel or full interrupt), and comprehensive exercises. Organizations conduct
testing based on the requirements in contingency plans and include a determination of the
effects on organizational operations, assets, and individuals due to contingency operations.
Organizations have flexibility and discretion in the breadth, depth, and timelines of corrective
actions.
CONTINGENCY PLAN TESTING | COORDINATE WITH RELATED PLANS
Coordinate contingency plan testing with organizational elements responsible for related
plans.
Discussion: Plans related to contingency planning for organizational systems include
Business Continuity Plans, Disaster Recovery Plans, Continuity of Operations Plans, Crisis
Communications Plans, Critical Infrastructure Plans, Cyber Incident Response Plans, and
Occupant Emergency Plans. Coordination of contingency plan testing does not require
organizations to create organizational elements to handle related plans or to align such
elements with specific plans. However, it does require that if such organizational elements
are responsible for related plans, organizations coordinate with those elements.
CONTINGENCY PLAN TESTING | ALTERNATE PROCESSING SITE
Test the contingency plan at the alternate processing site:
(a) To familiarize contingency personnel with the facility and available resources; and
(b) To evaluate the capabilities of the alternate processing site to support contingency
operations.
Discussion: Conditions at the alternate processing site may be significantly different than
the conditions at the primary site. Having the opportunity to visit the alternate site and
experience the actual capabilities available at the site can provide valuable information on
potential vulnerabilities that could affect essential organizational mission and business
functions. The on-site visit can also provide an opportunity to refine the contingency plan to
address the vulnerabilities discovered during testing.
CONTINGENCY PLAN TESTING | AUTOMATED TESTING
Test the contingency plan using [Assignment: organization-defined automated
mechanisms].
Discussion: Automated mechanisms facilitate thorough and effective testing of contingency
plans by providing more complete coverage of contingency issues, selecting more realistic
test scenarios and environments, and effectively stressing the system and supported mission
and business functions
CONTINGENCY PLAN TESTING | FULL RECOVERY AND RECONSTITUTION
Include a full recovery and reconstitution of the system to a known state as part of
contingency plan testing.
Discussion: Recovery is executing contingency plan activities to restore organizational
mission and business functions. Reconstitution takes place following recovery and includes
activities for returning systems to fully operational states. Organizations establish a known
state for systems that includes system state information for hardware, software programs,
and data. Preserving system state information facilitates system restart and return to the
operational mode of organizations with less disruption of mission and business processes.
CONTINGENCY PLAN TESTING | SELF-CHALLENGE
Employ [Assignment: organization-defined mechanisms] to [Assignment: organizationdefined system or system component] to disrupt and adversely affect the system or system
component.
Discussion: Often, the best method of assessing system resilience is to disrupt the system in
some manner. The mechanisms used by the organization could disrupt system functions or
system services in many ways, including terminating or disabling critical system components,
changing the configuration of system components, degrading critical functionality (e.g.,
restricting network bandwidth), or altering privileges. Automated, on-going, and simulated
cyber-attacks and service disruptions can reveal unexpected functional dependencies and
help the organization determine its ability to ensure resilience in the face of an actual cyberattack
INCIDENT RESPONSE TESTING
Control: Test the effectiveness of the incident response capability for the system [Assignment:
organization-defined frequency] using the following tests: [Assignment: organization-defined
tests].
Discussion: Organizations test incident response capabilities to determine their effectiveness
and identify potential weaknesses or deficiencies. Incident response testing includes the use of
checklists, walk-through or tabletop exercises, and simulations (parallel or full interrupt). Incident
response testing can include a determination of the effects on organizational operations and
assets and individuals due to incident response. The use of qualitative and quantitative data aids
in determining the effectiveness of incident response processes.
INCIDENT RESPONSE TESTING | AUTOMATED TESTING
Test the incident response capability using [Assignment: organization-defined automated
mechanisms].
Discussion: Organizations use automated mechanisms to more thoroughly and effectively
test incident response capabilities. This can be accomplished by providing more complete
coverage of incident response issues, selecting realistic test scenarios and environments, and
stressing the response capability.
INCIDENT RESPONSE TESTING | COORDINATION WITH RELATED PLANS
Coordinate incident response testing with organizational elements responsible for related
plans.
Discussion: Organizational plans related to incident response testing include business
continuity plans, disaster recovery plans, continuity of operations plans, contingency plans,
crisis communications plans, critical infrastructure plans, and occupant emergency plans
INCIDENT RESPONSE TESTING | CONTINUOUS IMPROVEMENT
Use qualitative and quantitative data from testing to:
(a) Determine the effectiveness of incident response processes;
(b) Continuously improve incident response processes; and
(c) Provide incident response measures and metrics that are accurate, consistent, and in a
reproducible format.
Discussion: To help incident response activities function as intended, organizations may use
metrics and evaluation criteria to assess incident response programs as part of an effort to
continually improve response performance. These efforts facilitate improvement in incident
response efficacy and lessen the impact of incidents.
TESTING, TRAINING, AND MONITORING
Control:
a. Implement a process for ensuring that organizational plans for conducting security and
privacy testing, training, and monitoring activities associated with organizational systems:
1. Are developed and maintained; and
2. Continue to be executed; and
b. Review testing, training, and monitoring plans for consistency with the organizational risk
management strategy and organization-wide priorities for risk response actions.
Discussion: A process for organization-wide security and privacy testing, training, and monitoring
helps ensure that organizations provide oversight for testing, training, and monitoring activities
and that those activities are coordinated. With the growing importance of continuous monitoring
programs, the implementation of information security and privacy across the three levels of the
risk management hierarchy and the widespread use of common controls, organizations
coordinate and consolidate the testing and monitoring activities that are routinely conducted as
part of ongoing assessments supporting a variety of controls. Security and privacy training
activities, while focused on individual systems and specific roles, require coordination across all
organizational elements. Testing, training, and monitoring plans and activities are informed by
current threat and vulnerability assessments.