PR.IP-7: Protection processes are improved
CONTROL ASSESSMENTS
Control:
a. Select the appropriate assessor or assessment team for the type of assessment to be
conducted;
b. Develop a control assessment plan that describes the scope of the assessment including:
1. Controls and control enhancements under assessment;
2. Assessment procedures to be used to determine control effectiveness; and
3. Assessment environment, assessment team, and assessment roles and responsibilities;
c. Ensure the control assessment plan is reviewed and approved by the authorizing official or
designated representative prior to conducting the assessment;
d. Assess the controls in the system and its environment of operation [Assignment:
organization-defined frequency] to determine the extent to which the controls are
implemented correctly, operating as intended, and producing the desired outcome with
respect to meeting established security and privacy requirements;
e. Produce a control assessment report that document the results of the assessment; and
f. Provide the results of the control assessment to [Assignment: organization-defined
individuals or roles].
Discussion: Organizations ensure that control assessors possess the required skills and technical
expertise to develop effective assessment plans and to conduct assessments of system-specific,
hybrid, common, and program management controls, as appropriate. The required skills include
general knowledge of risk management concepts and approaches as well as comprehensive
knowledge of and experience with the hardware, software, and firmware system components
implemented.
Organizations assess controls in systems and the environments in which those systems operate
as part of initial and ongoing authorizations, continuous monitoring, FISMA annual assessments,
system design and development, systems security engineering, privacy engineering, and the
system development life cycle. Assessments help to ensure that organizations meet information
security and privacy requirements, identify weaknesses and deficiencies in the system design and
development process, provide essential information needed to make risk-based decisions as part
of authorization processes, and comply with vulnerability mitigation procedures. Organizations
conduct assessments on the implemented controls as documented in security and privacy plans.
Assessments can also be conducted throughout the system development life cycle as part of
systems engineering and systems security engineering processes. The design for controls can be
assessed as RFPs are developed, responses assessed, and design reviews conducted. If a design
to implement controls and subsequent implementation in accordance with the design are
assessed during development, the final control testing can be a simple confirmation utilizing
previously completed control assessment and aggregating the outcomes.
Organizations may develop a single, consolidated security and privacy assessment plan for the
system or maintain separate plans. A consolidated assessment plan clearly delineates the roles
and responsibilities for control assessment. If multiple organizations participate in assessing a
system, a coordinated approach can reduce redundancies and associated costs.
Organizations can use other types of assessment activities, such as vulnerability scanning and
system monitoring, to maintain the security and privacy posture of systems during the system
life cycle. Assessment reports document assessment results in sufficient detail, as deemed
necessary by organizations, to determine the accuracy and completeness of the reports and
whether the controls are implemented correctly, operating as intended, and producing the
desired outcome with respect to meeting requirements. Assessment results are provided to the
individuals or roles appropriate for the types of assessments being conducted. For example,
assessments conducted in support of authorization decisions are provided to authorizing
officials, senior agency officials for privacy, senior agency information security officers, and
authorizing official designated representatives.
To satisfy annual assessment requirements, organizations can use assessment results from the
following sources: initial or ongoing system authorizations, continuous monitoring, systems
engineering processes, or system development life cycle activities. Organizations ensure that
assessment results are current, relevant to the determination of control effectiveness, and
obtained with the appropriate level of assessor independence. Existing control assessment
results can be reused to the extent that the results are still valid and can also be supplemented
with additional assessments as needed. After the initial authorizations, organizations assess
controls during continuous monitoring. Organizations also establish the frequency for ongoing
assessments in accordance with organizational continuous monitoring strategies. External audits,
including audits by external entities such as regulatory agencies, are outside of the scope of CA-2.
CONTROL ASSESSMENTS | INDEPENDENT ASSESSORS
Employ independent assessors or assessment teams to conduct control assessments.
Discussion: Independent assessors or assessment teams are individuals or groups who
conduct impartial assessments of systems. Impartiality means that assessors are free from
any perceived or actual conflicts of interest regarding the development, operation,
sustainment, or management of the systems under assessment or the determination of
control effectiveness. To achieve impartiality, assessors do not create a mutual or conflicting
interest with the organizations where the assessments are being conducted, assess their
own work, act as management or employees of the organizations they are serving, or place
themselves in positions of advocacy for the organizations acquiring their services.
Independent assessments can be obtained from elements within organizations or be
contracted to public or private sector entities outside of organizations. Authorizing officials
determine the required level of independence based on the security categories of systems
and/or the risk to organizational operations, organizational assets, or individuals. Authorizing
officials also determine if the level of assessor independence provides sufficient assurance
that the results are sound and can be used to make credible, risk-based decisions. Assessor
independence determination includes whether contracted assessment services have
sufficient independence, such as when system owners are not directly involved in
contracting processes or cannot influence the impartiality of the assessors conducting the
assessments. During the system design and development phase, having independent
assessors is analogous to having independent SMEs involved in design reviews.
When organizations that own the systems are small or the structures of the organizations
require that assessments be conducted by individuals that are in the developmental,
operational, or management chain of the system owners, independence in assessment
processes can be achieved by ensuring that assessment results are carefully reviewed and
analyzed by independent teams of experts to validate the completeness, accuracy, integrity,
and reliability of the results. Assessments performed for purposes other than to support
authorization decisions are more likely to be useable for such decisions when performed by
assessors with sufficient independence, thereby reducing the need to repeat assessments.
CONTROL ASSESSMENTS | SPECIALIZED ASSESSMENTS
Include as part of control assessments, [Assignment: organization-defined frequency],
[Selection: announced; unannounced], [Selection (one or more): in-depth monitoring;
security instrumentation; automated security test cases; vulnerability scanning; malicious
user testing; insider threat assessment; performance and load testing; data leakage or
data loss assessment; [Assignment: organization-defined other forms of assessment]].
Discussion: Organizations can conduct specialized assessments, including verification and
validation, system monitoring, insider threat assessments, malicious user testing, and other
forms of testing. These assessments can improve readiness by exercising organizational
capabilities and indicating current levels of performance as a means of focusing actions to
improve security and privacy. Organizations conduct specialized assessments in accordance
with applicable laws, executive orders, directives, regulations, policies, standards, and
guidelines. Authorizing officials approve the assessment methods in coordination with the
organizational risk executive function. Organizations can include vulnerabilities uncovered
during assessments into vulnerability remediation processes. Specialized assessments can
also be conducted early in the system development life cycle (e.g., during initial design,
development, and unit testing).
CONTROL ASSESSMENTS | LEVERAGING RESULTS FROM EXTERNAL ORGANIZATIONS
Leverage the results of control assessments performed by [Assignment: organizationdefined external organization] on [Assignment: organization-defined system] when the
assessment meets [Assignment: organization-defined requirements].
Discussion: Organizations may rely on control assessments of organizational systems by
other (external) organizations. Using such assessments and reusing existing assessment
evidence can decrease the time and resources required for assessments by limiting the
independent assessment activities that organizations need to perform. The factors that
organizations consider in determining whether to accept assessment results from external
organizations can vary. Such factors include the organization’s past experience with the
organization that conducted the assessment, the reputation of the assessment organization,
the level of detail of supporting assessment evidence provided, and mandates imposed by
applicable laws, executive orders, directives, regulations, policies, standards, and guidelines.
Accredited testing laboratories that support the Common Criteria Program [ISO 15408-1],
the NIST Cryptographic Module Validation Program (CMVP), or the NIST Cryptographic
Algorithm Validation Program (CAVP) can provide independent assessment results that
organizations can leverage.
CONTINUOUS MONITORING
Control: Develop a system-level continuous monitoring strategy and implement continuous
monitoring in accordance with the organization-level continuous monitoring strategy that
includes:
a. Establishing the following system-level metrics to be monitored: [Assignment: organizationdefined system-level metrics];
b. Establishing [Assignment: organization-defined frequencies] for monitoring and
[Assignment: organization-defined frequencies] for assessment of control effectiveness;
c. Ongoing control assessments in accordance with the continuous monitoring strategy;
d. Ongoing monitoring of system and organization-defined metrics in accordance with the
continuous monitoring strategy;
e. Correlation and analysis of information generated by control assessments and monitoring;
f. Response actions to address results of the analysis of control assessment and monitoring
information; and
g. Reporting the security and privacy status of the system to [Assignment: organizationdefined personnel or roles] [Assignment: organization-defined frequency].
Discussion: Continuous monitoring at the system level facilitates ongoing awareness of the
system security and privacy posture to support organizational risk management decisions. The
terms “continuous” and “ongoing” imply that organizations assess and monitor their controls
and risks at a frequency sufficient to support risk-based decisions. Different types of controls may
require different monitoring frequencies. The results of continuous monitoring generate risk
response actions by organizations. When monitoring the effectiveness of multiple controls that
have been grouped into capabilities, a root-cause analysis may be needed to determine the
specific control that has failed. Continuous monitoring programs allow organizations to maintain
the authorizations of systems and common controls in highly dynamic environments of operation
with changing mission and business needs, threats, vulnerabilities, and technologies. Having
access to security and privacy information on a continuing basis through reports and dashboards
gives organizational officials the ability to make effective and timely risk management decisions,
including ongoing authorization decisions.
Automation supports more frequent updates to hardware, software, and firmware inventories,
authorization packages, and other system information. Effectiveness is further enhanced when
continuous monitoring outputs are formatted to provide information that is specific, measurable,
actionable, relevant, and timely. Continuous monitoring activities are scaled in accordance with
the security categories of systems. Monitoring requirements, including the need for specific
monitoring, may be referenced in other controls and control enhancements,
CONTINUOUS MONITORING | INDEPENDENT ASSESSMENT
Employ independent assessors or assessment teams to monitor the controls in the system
on an ongoing basis.
Discussion: Organizations maximize the value of control assessments by requiring that
assessments be conducted by assessors with appropriate levels of independence. The level
of required independence is based on organizational continuous monitoring strategies.
Assessor independence provides a degree of impartiality to the monitoring process. To
achieve such impartiality, assessors do not create a mutual or conflicting interest with the
organizations where the assessments are being conducted, assess their own work, act as
management or employees of the organizations they are serving, or place themselves in
advocacy positions for the organizations acquiring their services.
CONTINUOUS MONITORING | TREND ANALYSES
Employ trend analyses to determine if control implementations, the frequency of
continuous monitoring activities, and the types of activities used in the continuous
monitoring process need to be modified based on empirical data.
Discussion: Trend analyses include examining recent threat information that addresses the
types of threat events that have occurred in the organization or the Federal Government,
success rates of certain types of attacks, emerging vulnerabilities in technologies, evolving
social engineering techniques, the effectiveness of configuration settings, results from
multiple control assessments, and findings from Inspectors General or auditors.
CONTINUOUS MONITORING | RISK MONITORING
Ensure risk monitoring is an integral part of the continuous monitoring strategy that
includes the following:
(a) Effectiveness monitoring;
(b) Compliance monitoring; and
(c) Change monitoring.
Discussion: Risk monitoring is informed by the established organizational risk tolerance.
Effectiveness monitoring determines the ongoing effectiveness of the implemented risk
response measures. Compliance monitoring verifies that required risk response measures
are implemented. It also verifies that security and privacy requirements are satisfied. Change
monitoring identifies changes to organizational systems and environments of operation that
may affect security and privacy risk.
CONTINUOUS MONITORING | CONSISTENCY ANALYSIS
Employ the following actions to validate that policies are established and implemented
controls are operating in a consistent manner: [Assignment: organization-defined actions].
Discussion: Security and privacy controls are often added incrementally to a system. As a
result, policies for selecting and implementing controls may be inconsistent, and the controls
could fail to work together in a consistent or coordinated manner. At a minimum, the lack of
consistency and coordination could mean that there are unacceptable security and privacy
gaps in the system. At worst, it could mean that some of the controls implemented in one
location or by one component are actually impeding the functionality of other controls (e.g.,
encrypting internal network traffic can impede monitoring). In other situations, failing to
consistently monitor all implemented network protocols (e.g., a dual stack of IPv4 and IPv6)
may create unintended vulnerabilities in the system that could be exploited by adversaries.
It is important to validate—through testing, monitoring, and analysis—that the implemented
controls are operating in a consistent, coordinated, non-interfering manner
CONTINUOUS MONITORING | AUTOMATION SUPPORT FOR MONITORING
Ensure the accuracy, currency, and availability of monitoring results for the system using
[Assignment: organization-defined automated mechanisms].
Discussion: Using automated tools for monitoring helps to maintain the accuracy, currency,
and availability of monitoring information which in turns helps to increase the level of
ongoing awareness of the system security and privacy posture in support of organizational
risk management decisions.
CONTINGENCY PLAN
Control:
a. Develop a contingency plan for the system that:
1. Identifies essential mission and business functions and associated contingency
requirements;
2. Provides recovery objectives, restoration priorities, and metrics;
3. Addresses contingency roles, responsibilities, assigned individuals with contact
information;
4. Addresses maintaining essential mission and business functions despite a system
disruption, compromise, or failure;
5. Addresses eventual, full system restoration without deterioration of the controls
originally planned and implemented;
6. Addresses the sharing of contingency information; and
7. Is reviewed and approved by [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles];
b. Distribute copies of the contingency plan to [Assignment: organization-defined key
contingency personnel (identified by name and/or by role) and organizational elements];
c. Coordinate contingency planning activities with incident handling activities;
d. Review the contingency plan for the system [Assignment: organization-defined frequency];
e. Update the contingency plan to address changes to the organization, system, or
environment of operation and problems encountered during contingency plan
implementation, execution, or testing;
f. Communicate contingency plan changes to [Assignment: organization-defined key
contingency personnel (identified by name and/or by role) and organizational elements];
g. Incorporate lessons learned from contingency plan testing, training, or actual contingency
activities into contingency testing and training; and
h. Protect the contingency plan from unauthorized disclosure and modification.
Discussion: Contingency planning for systems is part of an overall program for achieving
continuity of operations for organizational mission and business functions. Contingency planning
addresses system restoration and implementation of alternative mission or business processes
when systems are compromised or breached. Contingency planning is considered throughout the
system development life cycle and is a fundamental part of the system design. Systems can be
designed for redundancy, to provide backup capabilities, and for resilience. Contingency plans
reflect the degree of restoration required for organizational systems since not all systems need
to fully recover to achieve the level of continuity of operations desired. System recovery
objectives reflect applicable laws, executive orders, directives, regulations, policies, standards,
guidelines, organizational risk tolerance, and system impact level.
Actions addressed in contingency plans include orderly system degradation, system shutdown,
fallback to a manual mode, alternate information flows, and operating in modes reserved for
when systems are under attack. By coordinating contingency planning with incident handling
activities, organizations ensure that the necessary planning activities are in place and activated in
the event of an incident. Organizations consider whether continuity of operations during an
incident conflicts with the capability to automatically disable the system, as specified in IR-4(5).
Incident response planning is part of contingency planning for organizations and is addressed in
the IR (Incident Response) family.
CONTINGENCY PLAN | COORDINATE WITH RELATED PLANS
Coordinate contingency plan development with organizational elements responsible for
related plans.
Discussion: Plans that are related to contingency plans include Business Continuity Plans,
Disaster Recovery Plans, Critical Infrastructure Plans, Continuity of Operations Plans, Crisis
Communications Plans, Insider Threat Implementation Plans, Data Breach Response Plans,
Cyber Incident Response Plans, Breach Response Plans, and Occupant Emergency Plans.
CONTINGENCY PLAN | CAPACITY PLANNING
Conduct capacity planning so that necessary capacity for information processing,
telecommunications, and environmental support exists during contingency operations.
Discussion: Capacity planning is needed because different threats can result in a reduction
of the available processing, telecommunications, and support services intended to support
essential mission and business functions. Organizations anticipate degraded operations
during contingency operations and factor the degradation into capacity planning. For
capacity planning, environmental support refers to any environmental factor for which the
organization determines that it needs to provide support in a contingency situation, even if
in a degraded state. Such determinations are based on an organizational assessment of risk,
system categorization (impact level), and organizational risk tolerance.
CONTINGENCY PLAN | RESUME MISSION AND BUSINESS FUNCTIONS
Plan for the resumption of [Selection: all; essential] mission and business functions within
[Assignment: organization-defined time period] of contingency plan activation.
Discussion: Organizations may choose to conduct contingency planning activities to resume
mission and business functions as part of business continuity planning or as part of business
impact analyses. Organizations prioritize the resumption of mission and business functions.
The time period for resuming mission and business functions may be dependent on the
severity and extent of the disruptions to the system and its supporting infrastructure.
CONTINGENCY PLAN | CONTINUE MISSION AND BUSINESS FUNCTIONS
Plan for the continuance of [Selection: all; essential] mission and business functions with
minimal or no loss of operational continuity and sustains that continuity until full system
restoration at primary processing and/or storage sites.
Discussion: Organizations may choose to conduct the contingency planning activities to
continue mission and business functions as part of business continuity planning or business
impact analyses. Primary processing and/or storage sites defined by organizations as part of
contingency planning may change depending on the circumstances associated with the
contingency.
CONTINGENCY PLAN | ALTERNATE PROCESSING AND STORAGE SITES
Plan for the transfer of [Selection: all; essential] mission and business functions to
alternate processing and/or storage sites with minimal or no loss of operational continuity
and sustain that continuity through system restoration to primary processing and/or
storage sites.
Discussion: Organizations may choose to conduct contingency planning activities for
alternate processing and storage sites as part of business continuity planning or business
impact analyses. Primary processing and/or storage sites defined by organizations as part of
contingency planning may change depending on the circumstances associated with the
contingency.
CONTINGENCY PLAN | COORDINATE WITH EXTERNAL SERVICE PROVIDERS
Coordinate the contingency plan with the contingency plans of external service providers
to ensure that contingency requirements can be satisfied.
Discussion: When the capability of an organization to carry out its mission and business
functions is dependent on external service providers, developing a comprehensive and
timely contingency plan may become more challenging. When mission and business
functions are dependent on external service providers, organizations coordinate contingency
planning activities with the external entities to ensure that the individual plans reflect the
overall contingency needs of the organization
CONTINGENCY PLAN | IDENTIFY CRITICAL ASSETS
Identify critical system assets supporting [Selection: all; essential] mission and business
functions.
Discussion: Organizations may choose to identify critical assets as part of criticality analysis,
business continuity planning, or business impact analyses. Organizations identify critical
system assets so that additional controls can be employed (beyond the controls routinely
implemented) to help ensure that organizational mission and business functions can
continue to be conducted during contingency operations. The identification of critical
information assets also facilitates the prioritization of organizational resources. Critical
system assets include technical and operational aspects. Technical aspects include system
components, information technology services, information technology products, and
mechanisms. Operational aspects include procedures (i.e., manually executed operations)
and personnel (i.e., individuals operating technical controls and/or executing manual
procedures). Organizational program protection plans can assist in identifying critical assets.
If critical assets are resident within or supported by external service providers, organizations
consider implementing CP-2(7) as a control enhancement.
INCIDENT RESPONSE PLAN
Control:
a. Develop an incident response plan that:
1. Provides the organization with a roadmap for implementing its incident response
capability;
2. Describes the structure and organization of the incident response capability;
3. Provides a high-level approach for how the incident response capability fits into the
overall organization;
4. Meets the unique requirements of the organization, which relate to mission, size,
structure, and functions;
5. Defines reportable incidents;
Provides metrics for measuring the incident response capability within the organization;
7. Defines the resources and management support needed to effectively maintain and
mature an incident response capability;
8. Addresses the sharing of incident information;
9. Is reviewed and approved by [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles]
[Assignment: organization-defined frequency]; and
10. Explicitly designates responsibility for incident response to [Assignment: organizationdefined entities, personnel, or roles].
b. Distribute copies of the incident response plan to [Assignment: organization-defined incident
response personnel (identified by name and/or by role) and organizational elements];
c. Update the incident response plan to address system and organizational changes or
problems encountered during plan implementation, execution, or testing;
d. Communicate incident response plan changes to [Assignment: organization-defined incident
response personnel (identified by name and/or by role) and organizational elements]; and
e. Protect the incident response plan from unauthorized disclosure and modification.
Discussion: It is important that organizations develop and implement a coordinated approach to
incident response. Organizational mission and business functions determine the structure of
incident response capabilities. As part of the incident response capabilities, organizations
consider the coordination and sharing of information with external organizations, including
external service providers and other organizations involved in the supply chain. For incidents
involving personally identifiable information (i.e., breaches), include a process to determine
whether notice to oversight organizations or affected individuals is appropriate and provide that
notice accordingly.
INCIDENT RESPONSE PLAN | BREACHES
Include the following in the Incident Response Plan for breaches involving personally
identifiable information:
(a) A process to determine if notice to individuals or other organizations, including
oversight organizations, is needed;
(b) An assessment process to determine the extent of the harm, embarrassment,
inconvenience, or unfairness to affected individuals and any mechanisms to mitigate
such harms; and
(c) Identification of applicable privacy requirements.
Discussion: Organizations may be required by law, regulation, or policy to follow specific
procedures relating to breaches, including notice to individuals, affected organizations, and
oversight bodies; standards of harm; and mitigation or other specific requirements.
Control:
a. Develop security and privacy plans for the system that:
1. Are consistent with the organization’s enterprise architecture;
2. Explicitly define the constituent system components;
3. Describe the operational context of the system in terms of mission and business
processes;
4. Identify the individuals that fulfill system roles and responsibilities;
5. Identify the information types processed, stored, and transmitted by the system;
6. Provide the security categorization of the system, including supporting rationale;
7. Describe any specific threats to the system that are of concern to the organization;
8. Provide the results of a privacy risk assessment for systems processing personally
identifiable information;
9. Describe the operational environment for the system and any dependencies on or
connections to other systems or system components;
10. Provide an overview of the security and privacy requirements for the system;
11. Identify any relevant control baselines or overlays, if applicable;
12. Describe the controls in place or planned for meeting the security and privacy
requirements, including a rationale for any tailoring decisions;
13. Include risk determinations for security and privacy architecture and design decisions;
14. Include security- and privacy-related activities affecting the system that require planning
and coordination with [Assignment: organization-defined individuals or groups]; and
15. Are reviewed and approved by the authorizing official or designated representative
prior to plan implementation.
b. Distribute copies of the plans and communicate subsequent changes to the plans to
[Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles];
c. Review the plans [Assignment: organization-defined frequency];
d. Update the plans to address changes to the system and environment of operation or
problems identified during plan implementation or control assessments; and
e. Protect the plans from unauthorized disclosure and modification.
Discussion: System security and privacy plans are scoped to the system and system components
within the defined authorization boundary and contain an overview of the security and privacy
requirements for the system and the controls selected to satisfy the requirements. The plans
describe the intended application of each selected control in the context of the system with a
sufficient level of detail to correctly implement the control and to subsequently assess the
effectiveness of the control. The control documentation describes how system-specific and
hybrid controls are implemented and the plans and expectations regarding the functionality of
the system. System security and privacy plans can also be used in the design and development of
systems in support of life cycle-based security and privacy engineering processes. System security
and privacy plans are living documents that are updated and adapted throughout the system
development life cycle (e.g., during capability determination, analysis of alternatives, requests for
proposal, and design reviews). Section 2.1 describes the different types of requirements that are
relevant to organizations during the system development life cycle and the relationship between
requirements and controls.
Organizations may develop a single, integrated security and privacy plan or maintain separate
plans. Security and privacy plans relate security and privacy requirements to a set of controls and
control enhancements. The plans describe how the controls and control enhancements meet the
security and privacy requirements but do not provide detailed, technical descriptions of the
design or implementation of the controls and control enhancements. Security and privacy plans
contain sufficient information (including specifications of control parameter values for selection
and assignment operations explicitly or by reference) to enable a design and implementation
that is unambiguously compliant with the intent of the plans and subsequent determinations of
risk to organizational operations and assets, individuals, other organizations, and the Nation if
the plan is implemented.
Security and privacy plans need not be single documents. The plans can be a collection of various
documents, including documents that already exist. Effective security and privacy plans make
extensive use of references to policies, procedures, and additional documents, including design
and implementation specifications where more detailed information can be obtained. The use of
references helps reduce the documentation associated with security and privacy programs and
maintains the security- and privacy-related information in other established management and
operational areas, including enterprise architecture, system development life cycle, systems
engineering, and acquisition. Security and privacy plans need not contain detailed contingency
plan or incident response plan information but can instead provide—explicitly or by reference—
sufficient information to define what needs to be accomplished by those plans.
Security- and privacy-related activities that may require coordination and planning with other
individuals or groups within the organization include assessments, audits, inspections, hardware
and software maintenance, acquisition and supply chain risk management, patch management,
and contingency plan testing. Planning and coordination include emergency and nonemergency
(i.e., planned or non-urgent unplanned) situations. The process defined by organizations to plan
and coordinate security- and privacy-related activities can also be included in other documents,
as appropriate.
MEASURES OF PERFORMANCE
Control: Develop, monitor, and report on the results of information security and privacy
measures of performance.
Discussion: Measures of performance are outcome-based metrics used by an organization to
measure the effectiveness or efficiency of the information security and privacy programs and the
controls employed in support of the program. To facilitate security and privacy risk management,
organizations consider aligning measures of performance with the organizational risk tolerance
as defined in the risk management strategy.