PR.IP-11: Cybersecurity is included in human resources practices (e.g., deprovisioning, personnel screening)
POLICY AND PROCEDURES
Control:
a. Develop, document, and disseminate to [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or
roles]:
1. [Selection (one or more): Organization-level; Mission/business process-level; Systemlevel] personnel security policy that:
(a) Addresses purpose, scope, roles, responsibilities, management commitment,
coordination among organizational entities, and compliance; and
(b) Is consistent with applicable laws, executive orders, directives, regulations, policies,
standards, and guidelines; and
2. Procedures to facilitate the implementation of the personnel security policy and the
associated personnel security controls;
b. Designate an [Assignment: organization-defined official] to manage the development,
documentation, and dissemination of the personnel security policy and procedures; and
c. Review and update the current personnel security:
1. Policy [Assignment: organization-defined frequency] and following [Assignment:
organization-defined events]; and
2. Procedures [Assignment: organization-defined frequency] and following [Assignment:
organization-defined events].
Discussion: Personnel security policy and procedures for the controls in the PS family that are
implemented within systems and organizations. The risk management strategy is an important
factor in establishing such policies and procedures. Policies and procedures contribute to security
and privacy assurance. Therefore, it is important that security and privacy programs collaborate
on their development. Security and privacy program policies and procedures at the organization
level are preferable, in general, and may obviate the need for mission level or system-specific
policies and procedures. The policy can be included as part of the general security and privacy
policy or be represented by multiple policies reflecting the complex nature of organizations.
Procedures can be established for security and privacy programs, for mission/business processes,
and for systems, if needed. Procedures describe how the policies or controls are implemented
and can be directed at the individual or role that is the object of the procedure. Procedures can
be documented in system security and privacy plans or in one or more separate documents.
Events that may precipitate an update to personnel security policy and procedures include, but
are not limited to, assessment or audit findings, security incidents or breaches, or changes in
applicable laws, executive orders, directives, regulations, policies, standards, and guidelines.
Simply restating controls does not constitute an organizational policy or procedure.
POSITION RISK DESIGNATION
Control:
a. Assign a risk designation to all organizational positions;
b. Establish screening criteria for individuals filling those positions; and
c. Review and update position risk designations [Assignment: organization-defined frequency].
Discussion: Position risk designations reflect Office of Personnel Management (OPM) policy and
guidance. Proper position designation is the foundation of an effective and consistent suitability
and personnel security program. The Position Designation System (PDS) assesses the duties and
responsibilities of a position to determine the degree of potential damage to the efficiency or
integrity of the service due to misconduct of an incumbent of a position and establishes the risk
level of that position. The PDS assessment also determines if the duties and responsibilities of
the position present the potential for position incumbents to bring about a material adverse
effect on national security and the degree of that potential effect, which establishes the
sensitivity level of a position. The results of the assessment determine what level of investigation
is conducted for a position. Risk designations can guide and inform the types of authorizations
that individuals receive when accessing organizational information and information systems.
Position screening criteria include explicit information security role appointment requirements.
Parts 1400 and 731 of Title 5, Code of Federal Regulations, establish the requirements for
organizations to evaluate relevant covered positions for a position sensitivity and position risk
designation commensurate with the duties and responsibilities of those positions
PERSONNEL SCREENING
Control:
a. Screen individuals prior to authorizing access to the system; and
b. Rescreen individuals in accordance with [Assignment: organization-defined conditions
requiring rescreening and, where rescreening is so indicated, the frequency of rescreening].
Discussion: Personnel screening and rescreening activities reflect applicable laws, executive
orders, directives, regulations, policies, standards, guidelines, and specific criteria established for
the risk designations of assigned positions. Examples of personnel screening include background
investigations and agency checks. Organizations may define different rescreening conditions and
frequencies for personnel accessing systems based on types of information processed, stored, or
transmitted by the systems.
PERSONNEL SCREENING | CLASSIFIED INFORMATION
Verify that individuals accessing a system processing, storing, or transmitting classified
information are cleared and indoctrinated to the highest classification level of the
information to which they have access on the system.
Discussion: Classified information is the most sensitive information that the Federal
Government processes, stores, or transmits. It is imperative that individuals have the
requisite security clearances and system access authorizations prior to gaining access to such
information. Access authorizations are enforced by system access controls (see AC-3) and
flow controls (see AC-4).
PERSONNEL SCREENING | FORMAL INDOCTRINATION
Verify that individuals accessing a system processing, storing, or transmitting types of
classified information that require formal indoctrination, are formally indoctrinated for all
the relevant types of information to which they have access on the system.
Discussion: Types of classified information that require formal indoctrination include Special
Access Program (SAP), Restricted Data (RD), and Sensitive Compartmented Information (SCI)
PERSONNEL SCREENING | INFORMATION REQUIRING SPECIAL PROTECTIVE MEASURES
Verify that individuals accessing a system processing, storing, or transmitting information
requiring special protection:
(a) Have valid access authorizations that are demonstrated by assigned official
government duties; and
(b) Satisfy [Assignment: organization-defined additional personnel screening criteria].
Discussion: Organizational information that requires special protection includes controlled
unclassified information. Personnel security criteria include position sensitivity background
screening requirements.
PERSONNEL SCREENING | CITIZENSHIP REQUIREMENTS
Verify that individuals accessing a system processing, storing, or transmitting [Assignment:
organization-defined information types] meet [Assignment: organization-defined
citizenship requirements].
PERSONNEL TERMINATION
Control: Upon termination of individual employment:
a. Disable system access within [Assignment: organization-defined time period];
b. Terminate or revoke any authenticators and credentials associated with the individual;
c. Conduct exit interviews that include a discussion of [Assignment: organization-defined
information security topics];
d. Retrieve all security-related organizational system-related property; and
e. Retain access to organizational information and systems formerly controlled by terminated
individual.
Discussion: System property includes hardware authentication tokens, system administration
technical manuals, keys, identification cards, and building passes. Exit interviews ensure that
terminated individuals understand the security constraints imposed by being former employees
and that proper accountability is achieved for system-related property. Security topics at exit
interviews include reminding individuals of nondisclosure agreements and potential limitations
on future employment. Exit interviews may not always be possible for some individuals, including
in cases related to the unavailability of supervisors, illnesses, or job abandonment. Exit
interviews are important for individuals with security clearances. The timely execution of
termination actions is essential for individuals who have been terminated for cause. In certain
situations, organizations consider disabling the system accounts of individuals who are being
terminated prior to the individuals being notified.
PERSONNEL TERMINATION | POST-EMPLOYMENT REQUIREMENTS
(a) Notify terminated individuals of applicable, legally binding post-employment
requirements for the protection of organizational information; and
(b) Require terminated individuals to sign an acknowledgment of post-employment
requirements as part of the organizational termination process.
Discussion: Organizations consult with the Office of the General Counsel regarding matters
of post-employment requirements on terminated individuals.
PERSONNEL TERMINATION | AUTOMATED ACTIONS
Use [Assignment: organization-defined automated mechanisms] to [Selection (one or
more): notify [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles] of individual
termination actions; disable access to system resources].
Discussion: In organizations with many employees, not all personnel who need to know
about termination actions receive the appropriate notifications, or if such notifications are
received, they may not occur in a timely manner. Automated mechanisms can be used to
send automatic alerts or notifications to organizational personnel or roles when individuals
are terminated. Such automatic alerts or notifications can be conveyed in a variety of ways,
including via telephone, electronic mail, text message, or websites. Automated mechanisms
can also be employed to quickly and thoroughly disable access to system resources after an
employee is terminated.
PERSONNEL TRANSFER
Control:
a. Review and confirm ongoing operational need for current logical and physical access
authorizations to systems and facilities when individuals are reassigned or transferred to
other positions within the organization;
b. Initiate [Assignment: organization-defined transfer or reassignment actions] within
[Assignment: organization-defined time period following the formal transfer action];
c. Modify access authorization as needed to correspond with any changes in operational need
due to reassignment or transfer; and
d. Notify [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles] within [Assignment:
organization-defined time period].
Discussion: Personnel transfer applies when reassignments or transfers of individuals are
permanent or of such extended duration as to make the actions warranted. Organizations define
actions appropriate for the types of reassignments or transfers, whether permanent or extended.
Actions that may be required for personnel transfers or reassignments to other positions within
organizations include returning old and issuing new keys, identification cards, and building
passes; closing system accounts and establishing new accounts; changing system access
authorizations (i.e., privileges); and providing for access to official records to which individuals
had access at previous work locations and in previous system accounts.
ACCESS AGREEMENTS
Control:
a. Develop and document access agreements for organizational systems;
b. Review and update the access agreements [Assignment: organization-defined frequency];
and
c. Verify that individuals requiring access to organizational information and systems:
1. Sign appropriate access agreements prior to being granted access; and
2. Re-sign access agreements to maintain access to organizational systems when access
agreements have been updated or [Assignment: organization-defined frequency].
Discussion: Access agreements include nondisclosure agreements, acceptable use agreements,
rules of behavior, and conflict-of-interest agreements. Signed access agreements include an
acknowledgement that individuals have read, understand, and agree to abide by the constraints
associated with organizational systems to which access is authorized. Organizations can use
electronic signatures to acknowledge access agreements unless specifically prohibited by
organizational policy.
ACCESS AGREEMENTS | CLASSIFIED INFORMATION REQUIRING SPECIAL PROTECTION
Verify that access to classified information requiring special protection is granted only to
individuals who:
(a) Have a valid access authorization that is demonstrated by assigned official
government duties;
(b) Satisfy associated personnel security criteria; and
(c) Have read, understood, and signed a nondisclosure agreement.
Discussion: Classified information that requires special protection includes collateral
information, Special Access Program (SAP) information, and Sensitive Compartmented
Information (SCI). Personnel security criteria reflect applicable laws, executive orders,
directives, regulations, policies, standards, and guidelines
ACCESS AGREEMENTS | POST-EMPLOYMENT REQUIREMENTS
(a) Notify individuals of applicable, legally binding post-employment requirements for
protection of organizational information; and
(b) Require individuals to sign an acknowledgment of these requirements, if applicable, as
part of granting initial access to covered information.
Discussion: Organizations consult with the Office of the General Counsel regarding matters
of post-employment requirements on terminated individuals.
EXTERNAL PERSONNEL SECURITY
Control:
a. Establish personnel security requirements, including security roles and responsibilities for
external providers;
b. Require external providers to comply with personnel security policies and procedures
established by the organization;
c. Document personnel security requirements;
d. Require external providers to notify [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles] of
any personnel transfers or terminations of external personnel who possess organizational
credentials and/or badges, or who have system privileges within [Assignment: organizationdefined time period]; and
e. Monitor provider compliance with personnel security requirements.
Discussion: External provider refers to organizations other than the organization operating or
acquiring the system. External providers include service bureaus, contractors, and other
organizations that provide system development, information technology services, testing or
assessment services, outsourced applications, and network/security management. Organizations
explicitly include personnel security requirements in acquisition-related documents. External
providers may have personnel working at organizational facilities with credentials, badges, or
system privileges issued by organizations. Notifications of external personnel changes ensure the
appropriate termination of privileges and credentials. Organizations define the transfers and
terminations deemed reportable by security-related characteristics that include functions, roles,
and the nature of credentials or privileges associated with transferred or terminated individuals.
PERSONNEL SANCTIONS
Control:
a. Employ a formal sanctions process for individuals failing to comply with established
information security and privacy policies and procedures; and
b. Notify [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles] within [Assignment:
organization-defined time period] when a formal employee sanctions process is initiated,
identifying the individual sanctioned and the reason for the sanction.
Discussion: Organizational sanctions reflect applicable laws, executive orders, directives,
regulations, policies, standards, and guidelines. Sanctions processes are described in access
agreements and can be included as part of general personnel policies for organizations and/or
specified in security and privacy policies. Organizations consult with the Office of the General
Counsel regarding matters of employee sanctions.
DEVELOPER SCREENING
Control: Require that the developer of [Assignment: organization-defined system, system
component, or system service]:
a. Has appropriate access authorizations as determined by assigned [Assignment: organizationdefined official government duties]; and
b. Satisfies the following additional personnel screening criteria: [Assignment: organizationdefined additional personnel screening criteria].
Discussion: Developer screening is directed at external developers. Internal developer screening
is addressed by PS-3. Because the system, system component, or system service may be used in
critical activities essential to the national or economic security interests of the United States,
organizations have a strong interest in ensuring that developers are trustworthy. The degree of
trust required of developers may need to be consistent with that of the individuals who access
the systems, system components, or system services once deployed. Authorization and
personnel screening criteria include clearances, background checks, citizenship, and nationality.
Developer trustworthiness may also include a review and analysis of company ownership and
relationships that the company has with entities that may potentially affect the quality and
reliability of the systems, components, or services being developed. Satisfying the required
access authorizations and personnel screening criteria includes providing a list of all individuals
who are authorized to perform development activities on the selected system, system
component, or system service so that organizations can validate that the developer has satisfied
the authorization and screening requirements.