PR.IP-9: Response plans (Incident Response and Business Continuity) and recovery plans (Incident Recovery and Disaster Recovery) are in place and managed
CONTINGENCY PLAN
Control:
a. Develop a contingency plan for the system that:
1. Identifies essential mission and business functions and associated contingency
requirements;
2. Provides recovery objectives, restoration priorities, and metrics;
3. Addresses contingency roles, responsibilities, assigned individuals with contact
information;
4. Addresses maintaining essential mission and business functions despite a system
disruption, compromise, or failure;
5. Addresses eventual, full system restoration without deterioration of the controls
originally planned and implemented;
6. Addresses the sharing of contingency information; and
7. Is reviewed and approved by [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles];
b. Distribute copies of the contingency plan to [Assignment: organization-defined key
contingency personnel (identified by name and/or by role) and organizational elements];
c. Coordinate contingency planning activities with incident handling activities;
d. Review the contingency plan for the system [Assignment: organization-defined frequency];
e. Update the contingency plan to address changes to the organization, system, or
environment of operation and problems encountered during contingency plan
implementation, execution, or testing;
f. Communicate contingency plan changes to [Assignment: organization-defined key
contingency personnel (identified by name and/or by role) and organizational elements];
g. Incorporate lessons learned from contingency plan testing, training, or actual contingency
activities into contingency testing and training; and
h. Protect the contingency plan from unauthorized disclosure and modification.
Discussion: Contingency planning for systems is part of an overall program for achieving
continuity of operations for organizational mission and business functions. Contingency planning
addresses system restoration and implementation of alternative mission or business processes
when systems are compromised or breached. Contingency planning is considered throughout the
system development life cycle and is a fundamental part of the system design. Systems can be
designed for redundancy, to provide backup capabilities, and for resilience. Contingency plans
reflect the degree of restoration required for organizational systems since not all systems need
to fully recover to achieve the level of continuity of operations desired. System recovery
objectives reflect applicable laws, executive orders, directives, regulations, policies, standards,
guidelines, organizational risk tolerance, and system impact level.
Actions addressed in contingency plans include orderly system degradation, system shutdown,
fallback to a manual mode, alternate information flows, and operating in modes reserved for
when systems are under attack. By coordinating contingency planning with incident handling
activities, organizations ensure that the necessary planning activities are in place and activated in
the event of an incident. Organizations consider whether continuity of operations during an
incident conflicts with the capability to automatically disable the system, as specified in IR-4(5).
Incident response planning is part of contingency planning for organizations and is addressed in
the IR (Incident Response) family.
CONTINGENCY PLAN | COORDINATE WITH RELATED PLANS
Coordinate contingency plan development with organizational elements responsible for
related plans.
Discussion: Plans that are related to contingency plans include Business Continuity Plans,
Disaster Recovery Plans, Critical Infrastructure Plans, Continuity of Operations Plans, Crisis
Communications Plans, Insider Threat Implementation Plans, Data Breach Response Plans,
Cyber Incident Response Plans, Breach Response Plans, and Occupant Emergency Plans.
CONTINGENCY PLAN | CAPACITY PLANNING
Conduct capacity planning so that necessary capacity for information processing,
telecommunications, and environmental support exists during contingency operations.
Discussion: Capacity planning is needed because different threats can result in a reduction
of the available processing, telecommunications, and support services intended to support
essential mission and business functions. Organizations anticipate degraded operations
during contingency operations and factor the degradation into capacity planning. For
capacity planning, environmental support refers to any environmental factor for which the
organization determines that it needs to provide support in a contingency situation, even if
in a degraded state. Such determinations are based on an organizational assessment of risk,
system categorization (impact level), and organizational risk tolerance.
CONTINGENCY PLAN | RESUME MISSION AND BUSINESS FUNCTIONS
Plan for the resumption of [Selection: all; essential] mission and business functions within
[Assignment: organization-defined time period] of contingency plan activation.
Discussion: Organizations may choose to conduct contingency planning activities to resume
mission and business functions as part of business continuity planning or as part of business
impact analyses. Organizations prioritize the resumption of mission and business functions.
The time period for resuming mission and business functions may be dependent on the
severity and extent of the disruptions to the system and its supporting infrastructure.
CONTINGENCY PLAN | CONTINUE MISSION AND BUSINESS FUNCTIONS
Plan for the continuance of [Selection: all; essential] mission and business functions with
minimal or no loss of operational continuity and sustains that continuity until full system
restoration at primary processing and/or storage sites.
Discussion: Organizations may choose to conduct the contingency planning activities to
continue mission and business functions as part of business continuity planning or business
impact analyses. Primary processing and/or storage sites defined by organizations as part of
contingency planning may change depending on the circumstances associated with the
contingency.
CONTINGENCY PLAN | ALTERNATE PROCESSING AND STORAGE SITES
Plan for the transfer of [Selection: all; essential] mission and business functions to
alternate processing and/or storage sites with minimal or no loss of operational continuity
and sustain that continuity through system restoration to primary processing and/or
storage sites.
Discussion: Organizations may choose to conduct contingency planning activities for
alternate processing and storage sites as part of business continuity planning or business
impact analyses. Primary processing and/or storage sites defined by organizations as part of
contingency planning may change depending on the circumstances associated with the
contingency.
CONTINGENCY PLAN | COORDINATE WITH EXTERNAL SERVICE PROVIDERS
Coordinate the contingency plan with the contingency plans of external service providers
to ensure that contingency requirements can be satisfied.
Discussion: When the capability of an organization to carry out its mission and business
functions is dependent on external service providers, developing a comprehensive and
timely contingency plan may become more challenging. When mission and business
functions are dependent on external service providers, organizations coordinate contingency
planning activities with the external entities to ensure that the individual plans reflect the
overall contingency needs of the organization.
CONTINGENCY PLAN | IDENTIFY CRITICAL ASSETS
Identify critical system assets supporting [Selection: all; essential] mission and business
functions.
Discussion: Organizations may choose to identify critical assets as part of criticality analysis,
business continuity planning, or business impact analyses. Organizations identify critical
system assets so that additional controls can be employed (beyond the controls routinely
implemented) to help ensure that organizational mission and business functions can
continue to be conducted during contingency operations. The identification of critical
information assets also facilitates the prioritization of organizational resources. Critical
system assets include technical and operational aspects. Technical aspects include system
components, information technology services, information technology products, and
mechanisms. Operational aspects include procedures (i.e., manually executed operations)
and personnel (i.e., individuals operating technical controls and/or executing manual
procedures). Organizational program protection plans can assist in identifying critical assets.
If critical assets are resident within or supported by external service providers, organizations
consider implementing CP-2(7) as a control enhancement.
ALTERNATE PROCESSING SITE
Control:
a. Establish an alternate processing site, including necessary agreements to permit the transfer
and resumption of [Assignment: organization-defined system operations] for essential
mission and business functions within [Assignment: organization-defined time period
consistent with recovery time and recovery point objectives] when the primary processing
capabilities are unavailable;
b. Make available at the alternate processing site, the equipment and supplies required to
transfer and resume operations or put contracts in place to support delivery to the site
within the organization-defined time period for transfer and resumption; and
c. Provide controls at the alternate processing site that are equivalent to those at the primary
site.
Discussion: Alternate processing sites are geographically distinct from primary processing sites
and provide processing capability if the primary processing site is not available. The alternate
processing capability may be addressed using a physical processing site or other alternatives,
such as failover to a cloud-based service provider or other internally or externally provided
processing service. Geographically distributed architectures that support contingency
requirements may also be considered alternate processing sites. Controls that are covered by
alternate processing site agreements include the environmental conditions at alternate sites,
access rules, physical and environmental protection requirements, and the coordination for the
transfer and assignment of personnel. Requirements are allocated to alternate processing sites
that reflect the requirements in contingency plans to maintain essential mission and business
functions despite disruption, compromise, or failure in organizational systems
ALTERNATE PROCESSING SITE | SEPARATION FROM PRIMARY SITE
Identify an alternate processing site that is sufficiently separated from the primary
processing site to reduce susceptibility to the same threats.
Discussion: Threats that affect alternate processing sites are defined in organizational
assessments of risk and include natural disasters, structural failures, hostile attacks, and
errors of omission or commission. Organizations determine what is considered a sufficient
degree of separation between primary and alternate processing sites based on the types of
threats that are of concern. For threats such as hostile attacks, the degree of separation
between sites is less relevant.
ALTERNATE PROCESSING SITE | ACCESSIBILITY
Identify potential accessibility problems to alternate processing sites in the event of an
area-wide disruption or disaster and outlines explicit mitigation actions.
Discussion: Area-wide disruptions refer to those types of disruptions that are broad in
geographic scope with such determinations made by organizations based on organizational
assessments of risk.
ALTERNATE PROCESSING SITE | PRIORITY OF SERVICE
Develop alternate processing site agreements that contain priority-of-service provisions in
accordance with availability requirements (including recovery time objectives).
Discussion: Priority of service agreements refer to negotiated agreements with service
providers that ensure that organizations receive priority treatment consistent with their
availability requirements and the availability of information resources for logical alternate
processing and/or at the physical alternate processing site. Organizations establish recovery
time objectives as part of contingency planning.
ALTERNATE PROCESSING SITE | PREPARATION FOR USE
Prepare the alternate processing site so that the site can serve as the operational site
supporting essential mission and business functions.
Discussion: Site preparation includes establishing configuration settings for systems at the
alternate processing site consistent with the requirements for such settings at the primary
site and ensuring that essential supplies and logistical considerations are in place.
ALTERNATE PROCESSING SITE | INABILITY TO RETURN TO PRIMARY SITE
Plan and prepare for circumstances that preclude returning to the primary processing site.
Discussion: There may be situations that preclude an organization from returning to the
primary processing site such as if a natural disaster (e.g., flood or a hurricane) damaged or
destroyed a facility and it was determined that rebuilding in the same location was not
prudent.
Control: When [Assignment: organization-defined conditions] are detected, enter a safe mode of
operation with [Assignment: organization-defined restrictions of safe mode of operation].
Discussion: For systems that support critical mission and business functions—including military
operations, civilian space operations, nuclear power plant operations, and air traffic control
operations (especially real-time operational environments)—organizations can identify certain
conditions under which those systems revert to a predefined safe mode of operation. The safe
mode of operation, which can be activated either automatically or manually, restricts the
operations that systems can execute when those conditions are encountered. Restriction
includes allowing only selected functions to execute that can be carried out under limited power
or with reduced communications bandwidth.
ALTERNATIVE SECURITY MECHANISMS
Control: Employ [Assignment: organization-defined alternative or supplemental security
mechanisms] for satisfying [Assignment: organization-defined security functions] when the
primary means of implementing the security function is unavailable or compromised.
Discussion: Use of alternative security mechanisms supports system resiliency, contingency
planning, and continuity of operations. To ensure mission and business continuity, organizations
can implement alternative or supplemental security mechanisms. The mechanisms may be less
effective than the primary mechanisms. However, having the capability to readily employ
alternative or supplemental mechanisms enhances mission and business continuity that might
otherwise be adversely impacted if operations had to be curtailed until the primary means of
implementing the functions was restored. Given the cost and level of effort required to provide
such alternative capabilities, the alternative or supplemental mechanisms are only applied to
critical security capabilities provided by systems, system components, or system services. For
example, an organization may issue one-time pads to senior executives, officials, and system
administrators if multi-factor tokens—the standard means for achieving secure authentication—
are compromised.
INCIDENT RESPONSE ASSISTANCE
Control: Provide an incident response support resource, integral to the organizational incident
response capability, that offers advice and assistance to users of the system for the handling and
reporting of incidents.
Discussion: Incident response support resources provided by organizations include help desks,
assistance groups, automated ticketing systems to open and track incident response tickets, and
access to forensics services or consumer redress services, when required.
INCIDENT RESPONSE ASSISTANCE | AUTOMATION SUPPORT FOR AVAILABILITY OF INFORMATION AND
SUPPORT
Increase the availability of incident response information and support using [Assignment:
organization-defined automated mechanisms].
Discussion: Automated mechanisms can provide a push or pull capability for users to obtain
incident response assistance. For example, individuals may have access to a website to query
the assistance capability, or the assistance capability can proactively send incident response
information to users (general distribution or targeted) as part of increasing understanding of
current response capabilities and support.
INCIDENT RESPONSE ASSISTANCE | COORDINATION WITH EXTERNAL PROVIDERS
(a) Establish a direct, cooperative relationship between its incident response capability
and external providers of system protection capability; and
(b) Identify organizational incident response team members to the external providers.
Discussion: External providers of a system protection capability include the Computer
Network Defense program within the U.S. Department of Defense. External providers help to
protect, monitor, analyze, detect, and respond to unauthorized activity within organizational
information systems and networks. It may be beneficial to have agreements in place with
external providers to clarify the roles and responsibilities of each party before an incident
occurs
INCIDENT RESPONSE PLAN
Control:
a. Develop an incident response plan that:
1. Provides the organization with a roadmap for implementing its incident response
capability;
2. Describes the structure and organization of the incident response capability;
3. Provides a high-level approach for how the incident response capability fits into the
overall organization;
4. Meets the unique requirements of the organization, which relate to mission, size,
structure, and functions;
5. Defines reportable incidents;
Provides metrics for measuring the incident response capability within the organization;
7. Defines the resources and management support needed to effectively maintain and
mature an incident response capability;
8. Addresses the sharing of incident information;
9. Is reviewed and approved by [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles]
[Assignment: organization-defined frequency]; and
10. Explicitly designates responsibility for incident response to [Assignment: organizationdefined entities, personnel, or roles].
b. Distribute copies of the incident response plan to [Assignment: organization-defined incident
response personnel (identified by name and/or by role) and organizational elements];
c. Update the incident response plan to address system and organizational changes or
problems encountered during plan implementation, execution, or testing;
d. Communicate incident response plan changes to [Assignment: organization-defined incident
response personnel (identified by name and/or by role) and organizational elements]; and
e. Protect the incident response plan from unauthorized disclosure and modification.
Discussion: It is important that organizations develop and implement a coordinated approach to
incident response. Organizational mission and business functions determine the structure of
incident response capabilities. As part of the incident response capabilities, organizations
consider the coordination and sharing of information with external organizations, including
external service providers and other organizations involved in the supply chain. For incidents
involving personally identifiable information (i.e., breaches), include a process to determine
whether notice to oversight organizations or affected individuals is appropriate and provide that
notice accordingly.
INCIDENT RESPONSE PLAN | BREACHES
Include the following in the Incident Response Plan for breaches involving personally
identifiable information:
(a) A process to determine if notice to individuals or other organizations, including
oversight organizations, is needed;
(b) An assessment process to determine the extent of the harm, embarrassment,
inconvenience, or unfairness to affected individuals and any mechanisms to mitigate
such harms; and
(c) Identification of applicable privacy requirements.
Discussion: Organizations may be required by law, regulation, or policy to follow specific
procedures relating to breaches, including notice to individuals, affected organizations, and
oversight bodies; standards of harm; and mitigation or other specific requirements
INFORMATION SPILLAGE RESPONSE
Control: Respond to information spills by:
a. Assigning [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles] with responsibility for
responding to information spills;
Identifying the specific information involved in the system contamination;
c. Alerting [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles] of the information spill using
a method of communication not associated with the spill;
d. Isolating the contaminated system or system component;
e. Eradicating the information from the contaminated system or component;
f. Identifying other systems or system components that may have been subsequently
contaminated; and
g. Performing the following additional actions: [Assignment: organization-defined actions].
Discussion: Information spillage refers to instances where information is placed on systems that
are not authorized to process such information. Information spills occur when information that is
thought to be a certain classification or impact level is transmitted to a system and subsequently
is determined to be of a higher classification or impact level. At that point, corrective action is
required. The nature of the response is based on the classification or impact level of the spilled
information, the security capabilities of the system, the specific nature of the contaminated
storage media, and the access authorizations of individuals with authorized access to the
contaminated system. The methods used to communicate information about the spill after the
fact do not involve methods directly associated with the actual spill to minimize the risk of
further spreading the contamination before such contamination is isolated and eradicated.
INFORMATION SPILLAGE RESPONSE | TRAINING
Provide information spillage response training [Assignment: organization-defined
frequency].
Discussion: Organizations establish requirements for responding to information spillage
incidents in incident response plans. Incident response training on a regular basis helps to
ensure that organizational personnel understand their individual responsibilities and what
specific actions to take when spillage incidents occur.
INFORMATION SPILLAGE RESPONSE | POST-SPILL OPERATIONS
Implement the following procedures to ensure that organizational personnel impacted by
information spills can continue to carry out assigned tasks while contaminated systems are
undergoing corrective actions: [Assignment: organization-defined procedures].
Discussion: Corrective actions for systems contaminated due to information spillages may
be time-consuming. Personnel may not have access to the contaminated systems while
corrective actions are being taken, which may potentially affect their ability to conduct
organizational business.
INFORMATION SPILLAGE RESPONSE | EXPOSURE TO UNAUTHORIZED PERSONNEL
Employ the following controls for personnel exposed to information not within assigned
access authorizations: [Assignment: organization-defined controls].
Discussion: Controls include ensuring that personnel who are exposed to spilled information
are made aware of the laws, executive orders, directives, regulations, policies, standards,
and guidelines regarding the information and the restrictions imposed based on exposure to
such information.
ALTERNATE WORK SITE
Control:
a. Determine and document the [Assignment: organization-defined alternate work sites]
allowed for use by employees;
b. Employ the following controls at alternate work sites: [Assignment: organization-defined
controls];
c. Assess the effectiveness of controls at alternate work sites; and
d. Provide a means for employees to communicate with information security and privacy
personnel in case of incidents.
Discussion: Alternate work sites include government facilities or the private residences of
employees. While distinct from alternative processing sites, alternate work sites can provide
readily available alternate locations during contingency operations. Organizations can define
different sets of controls for specific alternate work sites or types of sites depending on the
work-related activities conducted at the sites. Implementing and assessing the effectiveness of
organization-defined controls and providing a means to communicate incidents at alternate work
sites supports the contingency planning activities of organizations.