PR.IP-4: Backups of information are conducted, maintained, and tested
CONTINGENCY PLAN TESTING
Control:
a. Test the contingency plan for the system [Assignment: organization-defined frequency] using
the following tests to determine the effectiveness of the plan and the readiness to execute
the plan: [Assignment: organization-defined tests].
b. Review the contingency plan test results; and
Initiate corrective actions, if needed.
Discussion: Methods for testing contingency plans to determine the effectiveness of the plans
and identify potential weaknesses include checklists, walk-through and tabletop exercises,
simulations (parallel or full interrupt), and comprehensive exercises. Organizations conduct
testing based on the requirements in contingency plans and include a determination of the
effects on organizational operations, assets, and individuals due to contingency operations.
Organizations have flexibility and discretion in the breadth, depth, and timelines of corrective
actions
CONTINGENCY PLAN TESTING | COORDINATE WITH RELATED PLANS
Coordinate contingency plan testing with organizational elements responsible for related
plans.
Discussion: Plans related to contingency planning for organizational systems include
Business Continuity Plans, Disaster Recovery Plans, Continuity of Operations Plans, Crisis
Communications Plans, Critical Infrastructure Plans, Cyber Incident Response Plans, and
Occupant Emergency Plans. Coordination of contingency plan testing does not require
organizations to create organizational elements to handle related plans or to align such
elements with specific plans. However, it does require that if such organizational elements
are responsible for related plans, organizations coordinate with those elements
CONTINGENCY PLAN TESTING | ALTERNATE PROCESSING SITE
Test the contingency plan at the alternate processing site:
(a) To familiarize contingency personnel with the facility and available resources; and
(b) To evaluate the capabilities of the alternate processing site to support contingency
operations.
Discussion: Conditions at the alternate processing site may be significantly different than
the conditions at the primary site. Having the opportunity to visit the alternate site and
experience the actual capabilities available at the site can provide valuable information on
potential vulnerabilities that could affect essential organizational mission and business
functions. The on-site visit can also provide an opportunity to refine the contingency plan to
address the vulnerabilities discovered during testing
CONTINGENCY PLAN TESTING | AUTOMATED TESTING
Test the contingency plan using [Assignment: organization-defined automated
mechanisms].
Discussion: Automated mechanisms facilitate thorough and effective testing of contingency
plans by providing more complete coverage of contingency issues, selecting more realistic
test scenarios and environments, and effectively stressing the system and supported mission
and business functions
CONTINGENCY PLAN TESTING | FULL RECOVERY AND RECONSTITUTION
Include a full recovery and reconstitution of the system to a known state as part of
contingency plan testing.
Discussion: Recovery is executing contingency plan activities to restore organizational
mission and business functions. Reconstitution takes place following recovery and includes
activities for returning systems to fully operational states. Organizations establish a known
state for systems that includes system state information for hardware, software programs,
and data. Preserving system state information facilitates system restart and return to the
operational mode of organizations with less disruption of mission and business processes.
CONTINGENCY PLAN TESTING | SELF-CHALLENGE
Employ [Assignment: organization-defined mechanisms] to [Assignment: organizationdefined system or system component] to disrupt and adversely affect the system or system
component.
Discussion: Often, the best method of assessing system resilience is to disrupt the system in
some manner. The mechanisms used by the organization could disrupt system functions or
system services in many ways, including terminating or disabling critical system components,
changing the configuration of system components, degrading critical functionality (e.g.,
restricting network bandwidth), or altering privileges. Automated, on-going, and simulated
cyber-attacks and service disruptions can reveal unexpected functional dependencies and
help the organization determine its ability to ensure resilience in the face of an actual cyberattack.
ALTERNATE STORAGE SITE
Control:
a. Establish an alternate storage site, including necessary agreements to permit the storage
and retrieval of system backup information; and
b. Ensure that the alternate storage site provides controls equivalent to that of the primary
site.
Discussion: Alternate storage sites are geographically distinct from primary storage sites and
maintain duplicate copies of information and data if the primary storage site is not available.
Similarly, alternate processing sites provide processing capability if the primary processing site is
not available. Geographically distributed architectures that support contingency requirements
may be considered alternate storage sites. Items covered by alternate storage site agreements
include environmental conditions at the alternate sites, access rules for systems and facilities,
physical and environmental protection requirements, and coordination of delivery and retrieval
of backup media. Alternate storage sites reflect the requirements in contingency plans so that
organizations can maintain essential mission and business functions despite compromise, failure,
or disruption in organizational systems.
ALTERNATE STORAGE SITE | SEPARATION FROM PRIMARY SITE
Identify an alternate storage site that is sufficiently separated from the primary storage
site to reduce susceptibility to the same threats.
Discussion: Threats that affect alternate storage sites are defined in organizational risk
assessments and include natural disasters, structural failures, hostile attacks, and errors of
omission or commission. Organizations determine what is considered a sufficient degree of
separation between primary and alternate storage sites based on the types of threats that
are of concern. For threats such as hostile attacks, the degree of separation between sites is
less relevant.
ALTERNATE STORAGE SITE | RECOVERY TIME AND RECOVERY POINT OBJECTIVES
Configure the alternate storage site to facilitate recovery operations in accordance with
recovery time and recovery point objectives.
Discussion: Organizations establish recovery time and recovery point objectives as part of
contingency planning. Configuration of the alternate storage site includes physical facilities
and the systems supporting recovery operations that ensure accessibility and correct
execution.
ALTERNATE STORAGE SITE | ACCESSIBILITY
Identify potential accessibility problems to the alternate storage site in the event of an
area-wide disruption or disaster and outline explicit mitigation actions.
Discussion: Area-wide disruptions refer to those types of disruptions that are broad in
geographic scope with such determinations made by organizations based on organizational
assessments of risk. Explicit mitigation actions include duplicating backup information at
other alternate storage sites if access problems occur at originally designated alternate sites
or planning for physical access to retrieve backup information if electronic accessibility to
the alternate site is disrupted.
SYSTEM BACKUP
Control:
a. Conduct backups of user-level information contained in [Assignment: organization-defined
system components] [Assignment: organization-defined frequency consistent with recovery
time and recovery point objectives];
b. Conduct backups of system-level information contained in the system [Assignment:
organization-defined frequency consistent with recovery time and recovery point objectives];
Conduct backups of system documentation, including security- and privacy-related
documentation [Assignment: organization-defined frequency consistent with recovery time
and recovery point objectives]; and
d. Protect the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of backup information.
Discussion: System-level information includes system state information, operating system
software, middleware, application software, and licenses. User-level information includes
information other than system-level information. Mechanisms employed to protect the integrity
of system backups include digital signatures and cryptographic hashes. Protection of system
backup information while in transit is addressed by MP-5 and SC-8. System backups reflect the
requirements in contingency plans as well as other organizational requirements for backing up
information. Organizations may be subject to laws, executive orders, directives, regulations, or
policies with requirements regarding specific categories of information (e.g., personal health
information). Organizational personnel consult with the senior agency official for privacy and
legal counsel regarding such requirements.
SYSTEM BACKUP | TESTING FOR RELIABILITY AND INTEGRITY
Test backup information [Assignment: organization-defined frequency] to verify media
reliability and information integrity.
Discussion: Organizations need assurance that backup information can be reliably retrieved.
Reliability pertains to the systems and system components where the backup information is
stored, the operations used to retrieve the information, and the integrity of the information
being retrieved. Independent and specialized tests can be used for each of the aspects of
reliability. For example, decrypting and transporting (or transmitting) a random sample of
backup files from the alternate storage or backup site and comparing the information to the
same information at the primary processing site can provide such assurance.
SYSTEM BACKUP | TEST RESTORATION USING SAMPLING
Use a sample of backup information in the restoration of selected system functions as part
of contingency plan testing.
Discussion: Organizations need assurance that system functions can be restored correctly
and can support established organizational missions. To ensure that the selected system
functions are thoroughly exercised during contingency plan testing, a sample of backup
information is retrieved to determine whether the functions are operating as intended.
Organizations can determine the sample size for the functions and backup information
based on the level of assurance needed.
SYSTEM BACKUP | SEPARATE STORAGE FOR CRITICAL INFORMATION
Store backup copies of [Assignment: organization-defined critical system software and
other security-related information] in a separate facility or in a fire rated container that is
not collocated with the operational system.
Discussion: Separate storage for critical information applies to all critical information
regardless of the type of backup storage media. Critical system software includes operating
systems, middleware, cryptographic key management systems, and intrusion detection
systems. Security-related information includes inventories of system hardware, software,
and firmware components. Alternate storage sites, including geographically distributed
architectures, serve as separate storage facilities for organizations. Organizations may
provide separate storage by implementing automated backup processes at alternative
storage sites (e.g., data centers). The General Services Administration (GSA) establishes
standards and specifications for security and fire rated containers.
SYSTEM BACKUP | TRANSFER TO ALTERNATE STORAGE SITE
Transfer system backup information to the alternate storage site [Assignment:
organization-defined time period and transfer rate consistent with the recovery time and
recovery point objectives].
Discussion: System backup information can be transferred to alternate storage sites either
electronically or by the physical shipment of storage media.
SYSTEM BACKUP | REDUNDANT SECONDARY SYSTEM
Conduct system backup by maintaining a redundant secondary system that is not
collocated with the primary system and that can be activated without loss of information
or disruption to operations.
Discussion: The effect of system backup can be achieved by maintaining a redundant
secondary system that mirrors the primary system, including the replication of information.
If this type of redundancy is in place and there is sufficient geographic separation between
the two systems, the secondary system can also serve as the alternate processing site.
SYSTEM BACKUP | DUAL AUTHORIZATION FOR DELETION OR DESTRUCTION
Enforce dual authorization for the deletion or destruction of [Assignment: organizationdefined backup information].
Discussion: Dual authorization ensures that deletion or destruction of backup information
cannot occur unless two qualified individuals carry out the task. Individuals deleting or
destroying backup information possess the skills or expertise to determine if the proposed
deletion or destruction of information reflects organizational policies and procedures. Dual
authorization may also be known as two-person control. To reduce the risk of collusion,
organizations consider rotating dual authorization duties to other individuals.
SYSTEM BACKUP | CRYPTOGRAPHIC PROTECTION
Implement cryptographic mechanisms to prevent unauthorized disclosure and
modification of [Assignment: organization-defined backup information].
Discussion: The selection of cryptographic mechanisms is based on the need to protect the
confidentiality and integrity of backup information. The strength of mechanisms selected is
commensurate with the security category or classification of the information. Cryptographic
protection applies to system backup information in storage at both primary and alternate
locations. Organizations that implement cryptographic mechanisms to protect information
at rest also consider cryptographic key management solutions.