PR.AC-7: Users, devices, and other assets are authenticated (e.g., single-factor, multi-factor) commensurate with the risk of the transaction (e.g., individuals’ security and privacy risks and other organizational risks)
UNSUCCESSFUL LOGON ATTEMPTS
Control:
a. Enforce a limit of [Assignment: organization-defined number] consecutive invalid logon
attempts by a user during a [Assignment: organization-defined time period]; and
b. Automatically [Selection (one or more): lock the account or node for an [Assignment:
organization-defined time period]; lock the account or node until released by an
administrator; delay next logon prompt per [Assignment: organization-defined delay
algorithm]; notify system administrator; take other [Assignment: organization-defined
action]] when the maximum number of unsuccessful attempts is exceeded.
Discussion: The need to limit unsuccessful logon attempts and take subsequent action when the
maximum number of attempts is exceeded applies regardless of whether the logon occurs via a
local or network connection. Due to the potential for denial of service, automatic lockouts
initiated by systems are usually temporary and automatically release after a predetermined,
organization-defined time period. If a delay algorithm is selected, organizations may employ
different algorithms for different components of the system based on the capabilities of those
components. Responses to unsuccessful logon attempts may be implemented at the operating
system and the application levels. Organization-defined actions that may be taken when the
number of allowed consecutive invalid logon attempts is exceeded include prompting the user to
answer a secret question in addition to the username and password, invoking a lockdown mode
with limited user capabilities (instead of full lockout), allowing users to only logon from specified
Internet Protocol (IP) addresses, requiring a CAPTCHA to prevent automated attacks, or applying
user profiles such as location, time of day, IP address, device, or Media Access Control (MAC)
address. If automatic system lockout or execution of a delay algorithm is not implemented in
support of the availability objective, organizations consider a combination of other actions to
help prevent brute force attacks. In addition to the above, organizations can prompt users to
respond to a secret question before the number of allowed unsuccessful logon attempts is
exceeded. Automatically unlocking an account after a specified period of time is generally not
permitted. However, exceptions may be required based on operational mission or need.
UNSUCCESSFUL LOGON ATTEMPTS | PURGE OR WIPE MOBILE DEVICE
Purge or wipe information from [Assignment: organization-defined mobile devices] based
on [Assignment: organization-defined purging or wiping requirements and techniques]
after [Assignment: organization-defined number] consecutive, unsuccessful device logon
attempts.
Discussion: A mobile device is a computing device that has a small form factor such that it
can be carried by a single individual; is designed to operate without a physical connection;
possesses local, non-removable or removable data storage; and includes a self-contained
power source. Purging or wiping the device applies only to mobile devices for which the
organization-defined number of unsuccessful logons occurs. The logon is to the mobile
device, not to any one account on the device. Successful logons to accounts on mobile
devices reset the unsuccessful logon count to zero. Purging or wiping may be unnecessary if
the information on the device is protected with sufficiently strong encryption mechanisms.
UNSUCCESSFUL LOGON ATTEMPTS | BIOMETRIC ATTEMPT LIMITING
Limit the number of unsuccessful biometric logon attempts to [Assignment: organizationdefined number].
Discussion: Biometrics are probabilistic in nature. The ability to successfully authenticate
can be impacted by many factors, including matching performance and presentation attack
detection mechanisms. Organizations select the appropriate number of attempts for users
based on organizationally-defined factors.
UNSUCCESSFUL LOGON ATTEMPTS | USE OF ALTERNATE AUTHENTICATION FACTOR
(a) Allow the use of [Assignment: organization-defined authentication factors] that are
different from the primary authentication factors after the number of organizationdefined consecutive invalid logon attempts have been exceeded; and
(b) Enforce a limit of [Assignment: organization-defined number] consecutive invalid
logon attempts through use of the alternative factors by a user during a [Assignment:
organization-defined time period].
Discussion: The use of alternate authentication factors supports the objective of availability
and allows a user who has inadvertently been locked out to use additional authentication
factors to bypass the lockout.
SYSTEM USE NOTIFICATION
Control:
a. Display [Assignment: organization-defined system use notification message or banner] to
users before granting access to the system that provides privacy and security notices
consistent with applicable laws, executive orders, directives, regulations, policies, standards,
and guidelines and state that:
1. Users are accessing a U.S. Government system;
2. System usage may be monitored, recorded, and subject to audit;
3. Unauthorized use of the system is prohibited and subject to criminal and civil penalties;
and
4. Use of the system indicates consent to monitoring and recording;
b. Retain the notification message or banner on the screen until users acknowledge the usage
conditions and take explicit actions to log on to or further access the system; and
c. For publicly accessible systems:
1. Display system use information [Assignment: organization-defined conditions], before
granting further access to the publicly accessible system;
2. Display references, if any, to monitoring, recording, or auditing that are consistent with
privacy accommodations for such systems that generally prohibit those activities; and
3. Include a description of the authorized uses of the system.
Discussion: System use notifications can be implemented using messages or warning banners
displayed before individuals log in to systems. System use notifications are used only for access
via logon interfaces with human users. Notifications are not required when human interfaces do
not exist. Based on an assessment of risk, organizations consider whether or not a secondary
system use notification is needed to access applications or other system resources after the
initial network logon. Organizations consider system use notification messages or banners
displayed in multiple languages based on organizational needs and the demographics of system
users. Organizations consult with the privacy office for input regarding privacy messaging and the
Office of the General Counsel or organizational equivalent for legal review and approval of
warning banner content.
PREVIOUS LOGON NOTIFICATION
Control: Notify the user, upon successful logon to the system, of the date and time of the last
logon.
Discussion: Previous logon notification is applicable to system access via human user interfaces
and access to systems that occurs in other types of architectures. Information about the last
successful logon allows the user to recognize if the date and time provided is not consistent with
the user’s last access.
PREVIOUS LOGON NOTIFICATION | UNSUCCESSFUL LOGONS
Notify the user, upon successful logon, of the number of unsuccessful logon attempts since
the last successful logon.
Discussion: Information about the number of unsuccessful logon attempts since the last
successful logon allows the user to recognize if the number of unsuccessful logon attempts is
consistent with the user’s actual logon attempts.
PREVIOUS LOGON NOTIFICATION | SUCCESSFUL AND UNSUCCESSFUL LOGONS
Notify the user, upon successful logon, of the number of [Selection: successful logons;
unsuccessful logon attempts; both] during [Assignment: organization-defined time period].
Discussion: Information about the number of successful and unsuccessful logon attempts
within a specified time period allows the user to recognize if the number and type of logon
attempts are consistent with the user’s actual logon attempts.
PREVIOUS LOGON NOTIFICATION | NOTIFICATION OF ACCOUNT CHANGES
Notify the user, upon successful logon, of changes to [Assignment: organization-defined
security-related characteristics or parameters of the user’s account] during [Assignment:
organization-defined time period].
Discussion: Information about changes to security-related account characteristics within a
specified time period allows users to recognize if changes were made without their
knowledge.
PREVIOUS LOGON NOTIFICATION | ADDITIONAL LOGON INFORMATION
Notify the user, upon successful logon, of the following additional information:
[Assignment: organization-defined additional information].
Discussion: Organizations can specify additional information to be provided to users upon
logon, including the location of the last logon. User location is defined as information that
can be determined by systems, such as Internet Protocol (IP) addresses from which network
logons occurred, notifications of local logons, or device identifiers.
DEVICE LOCK
Control:
a. Prevent further access to the system by [Selection (one or more): initiating a device lock after
[Assignment: organization-defined time period] of inactivity; requiring the user to initiate a
device lock before leaving the system unattended]; and
b. Retain the device lock until the user reestablishes access using established identification and
authentication procedures.
Discussion: Device locks are temporary actions taken to prevent logical access to organizational
systems when users stop work and move away from the immediate vicinity of those systems but
do not want to log out because of the temporary nature of their absences. Device locks can be
implemented at the operating system level or at the application level. A proximity lock may be
used to initiate the device lock (e.g., via a Bluetooth-enabled device or dongle). User-initiated
device locking is behavior or policy-based and, as such, requires users to take physical action to
initiate the device lock. Device locks are not an acceptable substitute for logging out of systems,
such as when organizations require users to log out at the end of workdays.
DEVICE LOCK | PATTERN-HIDING DISPLAYS
Conceal, via the device lock, information previously visible on the display with a publicly
viewable image.
Discussion: The pattern-hiding display can include static or dynamic images, such as
patterns used with screen savers, photographic images, solid colors, clock, battery life
indicator, or a blank screen with the caveat that controlled unclassified information is not
displayed
SESSION TERMINATION
Control: Automatically terminate a user session after [Assignment: organization-defined
conditions or trigger events requiring session disconnect].
Discussion: Session termination addresses the termination of user-initiated logical sessions (in
contrast to SC-10, which addresses the termination of network connections associated with
communications sessions (i.e., network disconnect)). A logical session (for local, network, and
remote access) is initiated whenever a user (or process acting on behalf of a user) accesses an
organizational system. Such user sessions can be terminated without terminating network
sessions. Session termination ends all processes associated with a user’s logical session except
for those processes that are specifically created by the user (i.e., session owner) to continue after
the session is terminated. Conditions or trigger events that require automatic termination of the
session include organization-defined periods of user inactivity, targeted responses to certain
types of incidents, or time-of-day restrictions on system use.
SESSION TERMINATION | USER-INITIATED LOGOUTS
Provide a logout capability for user-initiated communications sessions whenever
authentication is used to gain access to [Assignment: organization-defined information
resources].
Discussion: Information resources to which users gain access via authentication include local
workstations, databases, and password-protected websites or web-based services.
SESSION TERMINATION | TERMINATION MESSAGE
Display an explicit logout message to users indicating the termination of authenticated
communications sessions.
Discussion: Logout messages for web access can be displayed after authenticated sessions
have been terminated. However, for certain types of sessions, including file transfer protocol
(FTP) sessions, systems typically send logout messages as final messages prior to terminating
sessions
SESSION TERMINATION | TIMEOUT WARNING MESSAGE
Display an explicit message to users indicating that the session will end in [Assignment:
organization-defined time until end of session].
Discussion: To increase usability, notify users of pending session termination and prompt
users to continue the session. The pending session termination time period is based on the
parameters defined in the AC-12 base control.
PERMITTED ACTIONS WITHOUT IDENTIFICATION OR AUTHENTICATION
Control:
a. Identify [Assignment: organization-defined user actions] that can be performed on the
system without identification or authentication consistent with organizational mission and
business functions; and
b. Document and provide supporting rationale in the security plan for the system, user actions
not requiring identification or authentication.
Discussion: Specific user actions may be permitted without identification or authentication if
organizations determine that identification and authentication are not required for the specified
user actions. Organizations may allow a limited number of user actions without identification or
authentication, including when individuals access public websites or other publicly accessible
federal systems, when individuals use mobile phones to receive calls, or when facsimiles are
received. Organizations identify actions that normally require identification or authentication but
may, under certain circumstances, allow identification or authentication mechanisms to be
bypassed. Such bypasses may occur, for example, via a software-readable physical switch that
commands bypass of the logon functionality and is protected from accidental or unmonitored
use. Permitting actions without identification or authentication does not apply to situations
where identification and authentication have already occurred and are not repeated but rather
to situations where identification and authentication have not yet occurred. Organizations may
decide that there are no user actions that can be performed on organizational systems without
identification and authentication, and therefore, the value for the assignment operation can be
“none.”
POLICY AND PROCEDURES
Control:
a. Develop, document, and disseminate to [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or
roles]:
1. [Selection (one or more): Organization-level; Mission/business process-level; Systemlevel] identification and authentication policy that:
(a) Addresses purpose, scope, roles, responsibilities, management commitment,
coordination among organizational entities, and compliance; and
(b) Is consistent with applicable laws, executive orders, directives, regulations, policies,
standards, and guidelines; and
2. Procedures to facilitate the implementation of the identification and authentication
policy and the associated identification and authentication controls;
b. Designate an [Assignment: organization-defined official] to manage the development,
documentation, and dissemination of the identification and authentication policy and
procedures; and
c. Review and update the current identification and authentication:
1. Policy [Assignment: organization-defined frequency] and following [Assignment:
organization-defined events]; and
2. Procedures [Assignment: organization-defined frequency] and following [Assignment:
organization-defined events].
Discussion: Identification and authentication policy and procedures address the controls in the
IA family that are implemented within systems and organizations. The risk management strategy
is an important factor in establishing such policies and procedures. Policies and procedures
contribute to security and privacy assurance. Therefore, it is important that security and privacy
programs collaborate on the development of identification and authentication policy and
procedures. Security and privacy program policies and procedures at the organization level are
preferable, in general, and may obviate the need for mission- or system-specific policies and
procedures. The policy can be included as part of the general security and privacy policy or be
represented by multiple policies that reflect the complex nature of organizations. Procedures can
be established for security and privacy programs, for mission or business processes, and for
systems, if needed. Procedures describe how the policies or controls are implemented and can
be directed at the individual or role that is the object of the procedure. Procedures can be
documented in system security and privacy plans or in one or more separate documents. Events
that may precipitate an update to identification and authentication policy and procedures
include assessment or audit findings, security incidents or breaches, or changes in applicable
laws, executive orders, directives, regulations, policies, standards, and guidelines. Simply
restating controls does not constitute an organizational policy or procedure.
IDENTIFICATION AND AUTHENTICATION (ORGANIZATIONAL USERS)
Control: Uniquely identify and authenticate organizational users and associate that unique
identification with processes acting on behalf of those users.
Discussion: Organizations can satisfy the identification and authentication requirements by
complying with the requirements in [HSPD 12]. Organizational users include employees or
individuals who organizations consider to have an equivalent status to employees (e.g.,
contractors and guest researchers). Unique identification and authentication of users applies to
all accesses other than those that are explicitly identified in AC-14 and that occur through the
authorized use of group authenticators without individual authentication. Since processes
execute on behalf of groups and roles, organizations may require unique identification of
individuals in group accounts or for detailed accountability of individual activity.
Organizations employ passwords, physical authenticators, or biometrics to authenticate user
identities or, in the case of multi-factor authentication, some combination thereof. Access to
organizational systems is defined as either local access or network access. Local access is any
access to organizational systems by users or processes acting on behalf of users, where access is
obtained through direct connections without the use of networks. Network access is access to
organizational systems by users (or processes acting on behalf of users) where access is obtained
through network connections (i.e., nonlocal accesses). Remote access is a type of network access
that involves communication through external networks. Internal networks include local area
networks and wide area networks.
The use of encrypted virtual private networks for network connections between organizationcontrolled endpoints and non-organization-controlled endpoints may be treated as internal
networks with respect to protecting the confidentiality and integrity of information traversing
the network. Identification and authentication requirements for non-organizational users are
described in IA-8.
IDENTIFICATION AND AUTHENTICATION (ORGANIZATIONAL USERS) | MULTI-FACTOR
AUTHENTICATION TO PRIVILEGED ACCOUNTS
Implement multi-factor authentication for access to privileged accounts.
Discussion: Multi-factor authentication requires the use of two or more different factors to
achieve authentication. The authentication factors are defined as follows: something you
know (e.g., a personal identification number [PIN]), something you have (e.g., a physical
authenticator such as a cryptographic private key), or something you are (e.g., a biometric).
Multi-factor authentication solutions that feature physical authenticators include hardware
authenticators that provide time-based or challenge-response outputs and smart cards such
as the U.S. Government Personal Identity Verification (PIV) card or the Department of
Defense (DoD) Common Access Card (CAC). In addition to authenticating users at the system
level (i.e., at logon), organizations may employ authentication mechanisms at the application
level, at their discretion, to provide increased security. Regardless of the type of access (i.e.,
local, network, remote), privileged accounts are authenticated using multi-factor options
appropriate for the level of risk. Organizations can add additional security measures, such as
additional or more rigorous authentication mechanisms, for specific types of access.
IDENTIFICATION AND AUTHENTICATION (ORGANIZATIONAL USERS) | MULTI-FACTOR
AUTHENTICATION TO NON-PRIVILEGED ACCOUNTS
Implement multi-factor authentication for access to non-privileged accounts.
Discussion: Multi-factor authentication requires the use of two or more different factors to
achieve authentication. The authentication factors are defined as follows: something you
know (e.g., a personal identification number [PIN]), something you have (e.g., a physical
authenticator such as a cryptographic private key), or something you are (e.g., a biometric).
Multi-factor authentication solutions that feature physical authenticators include hardware
authenticators that provide time-based or challenge-response outputs and smart cards such
as the U.S. Government Personal Identity Verification card or the DoD Common Access Card.
In addition to authenticating users at the system level, organizations may also employ
authentication mechanisms at the application level, at their discretion, to provide increased
information security. Regardless of the type of access (i.e., local, network, remote), nonprivileged accounts are authenticated using multi-factor options appropriate for the level of
risk. Organizations can provide additional security measures, such as additional or more
rigorous authentication mechanisms, for specific types of access.
IDENTIFICATION AND AUTHENTICATION (ORGANIZATIONAL USERS) | INDIVIDUAL AUTHENTICATION
WITH GROUP AUTHENTICATION
When shared accounts or authenticators are employed, require users to be individually
authenticated before granting access to the shared accounts or resources.
Discussion: Individual authentication prior to shared group authentication mitigates the risk
of using group accounts or authenticators
IDENTIFICATION AND AUTHENTICATION (ORGANIZATIONAL USERS) | ACCESS TO ACCOUNTS —
SEPARATE DEVICE
Implement multi-factor authentication for [Selection (one or more): local; network;
remote] access to [Selection (one or more): privileged accounts; non-privileged accounts]
such that:
(a) One of the factors is provided by a device separate from the system gaining access;
and
(b) The device meets [Assignment: organization-defined strength of mechanism
requirements].
Discussion: The purpose of requiring a device that is separate from the system to which the
user is attempting to gain access for one of the factors during multi-factor authentication is
to reduce the likelihood of compromising authenticators or credentials stored on the
system. Adversaries may be able to compromise such authenticators or credentials and
subsequently impersonate authorized users. Implementing one of the factors on a separate
device (e.g., a hardware token), provides a greater strength of mechanism and an increased
level of assurance in the authentication process
IDENTIFICATION AND AUTHENTICATION (ORGANIZATIONAL USERS) | ACCESS TO ACCOUNTS —
REPLAY RESISTANT
Implement replay-resistant authentication mechanisms for access to [Selection (one or
more): privileged accounts; non-privileged accounts].
Discussion: Authentication processes resist replay attacks if it is impractical to achieve
successful authentications by replaying previous authentication messages. Replay-resistant
techniques include protocols that use nonces or challenges such as time synchronous or
cryptographic authenticators.
IDENTIFICATION AND AUTHENTICATION (ORGANIZATIONAL USERS) | SINGLE SIGN-ON
Provide a single sign-on capability for [Assignment: organization-defined system accounts
and services].
Discussion: Single sign-on enables users to log in once and gain access to multiple system
resources. Organizations consider the operational efficiencies provided by single sign-on
capabilities with the risk introduced by allowing access to multiple systems via a single
authentication event. Single sign-on can present opportunities to improve system security,
for example by providing the ability to add multi-factor authentication for applications and
systems (existing and new) that may not be able to natively support multi-factor
authentication.
IDENTIFICATION AND AUTHENTICATION (ORGANIZATIONAL USERS) | ACCEPTANCE OF PIV
CREDENTIALS
Accept and electronically verify Personal Identity Verification-compliant credentials.
Discussion: Acceptance of Personal Identity Verification (PIV)-compliant credentials applies
to organizations implementing logical access control and physical access control systems.
PIV-compliant credentials are those credentials issued by federal agencies that conform to
FIPS Publication 201 and supporting guidance documents. The adequacy and reliability of PIV
card issuers are authorized using [SP 800-79-2]. Acceptance of PIV-compliant credentials
includes derived PIV credentials, the use of which is addressed in [SP 800-166]. The DOD
Common Access Card (CAC) is an example of a PIV credential.
IDENTIFICATION AND AUTHENTICATION (ORGANIZATIONAL USERS) | OUT-OF-BAND
AUTHENTICATION
Implement the following out-of-band authentication mechanisms under [Assignment:
organization-defined conditions]: [Assignment: organization-defined out-of-band
authentication].
Discussion: Out-of-band authentication refers to the use of two separate communication
paths to identify and authenticate users or devices to an information system. The first path
(i.e., the in-band path) is used to identify and authenticate users or devices and is generally
the path through which information flows. The second path (i.e., the out-of-band path) is
used to independently verify the authentication and/or requested action. For example, a
user authenticates via a notebook computer to a remote server to which the user desires
access and requests some action of the server via that communication path. Subsequently,
the server contacts the user via the user’s cell phone to verify that the requested action
originated from the user. The user may confirm the intended action to an individual on the
telephone or provide an authentication code via the telephone. Out-of-band authentication
can be used to mitigate actual or suspected “man-in the-middle” attacks. The conditions or
criteria for activation include suspicious activities, new threat indicators, elevated threat
levels, or the impact or classification level of information in requested transactions.
DEVICE IDENTIFICATION AND AUTHENTICATION
Control: Uniquely identify and authenticate [Assignment: organization-defined devices and/or
types of devices] before establishing a [Selection (one or more): local; remote; network]
connection.
Discussion: Devices that require unique device-to-device identification and authentication are
defined by type, device, or a combination of type and device. Organization-defined device types
include devices that are not owned by the organization. Systems use shared known information
(e.g., Media Access Control [MAC], Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol [TCP/IP]
addresses) for device identification or organizational authentication solutions (e.g., Institute of
Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) 802.1x and Extensible Authentication Protocol [EAP],
RADIUS server with EAP-Transport Layer Security [TLS] authentication, Kerberos) to identify and
authenticate devices on local and wide area networks. Organizations determine the required
strength of authentication mechanisms based on the security categories of systems and mission
or business requirements. Because of the challenges of implementing device authentication on a
large scale, organizations can restrict the application of the control to a limited number/type of
devices based on mission or business needs.
DEVICE IDENTIFICATION AND AUTHENTICATION | CRYPTOGRAPHIC BIDIRECTIONAL AUTHENTICATION
Authenticate [Assignment: organization-defined devices and/or types of devices] before
establishing [Selection (one or more): local; remote; network] connection using
bidirectional authentication that is cryptographically based.
Discussion: A local connection is a connection with a device that communicates without the
use of a network. A network connection is a connection with a device that communicates
through a network. A remote connection is a connection with a device that communicates
through an external network. Bidirectional authentication provides stronger protection to
validate the identity of other devices for connections that are of greater risk.
DEVICE IDENTIFICATION AND AUTHENTICATION | CRYPTOGRAPHIC BIDIRECTIONAL NETWORK
AUTHENTICATION
DEVICE IDENTIFICATION AND AUTHENTICATION | DYNAMIC ADDRESS ALLOCATION
(a) Where addresses are allocated dynamically, standardize dynamic address allocation
lease information and the lease duration assigned to devices in accordance with
[Assignment: organization-defined lease information and lease duration]; and
(b) Audit lease information when assigned to a device.
Discussion: The Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP) is an example of a means by
which clients can dynamically receive network address assignments.
DEVICE IDENTIFICATION AND AUTHENTICATION | DEVICE ATTESTATION
Handle device identification and authentication based on attestation by [Assignment:
organization-defined configuration management process].
Discussion: Device attestation refers to the identification and authentication of a device
based on its configuration and known operating state. Device attestation can be determined
via a cryptographic hash of the device. If device attestation is the means of identification and
authentication, then it is important that patches and updates to the device are handled via a
configuration management process such that the patches and updates are done securely
and do not disrupt identification and authentication to other devices.
IDENTIFIER MANAGEMENT
Control: Manage system identifiers by:
a. Receiving authorization from [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles] to assign
an individual, group, role, service, or device identifier;
b. Selecting an identifier that identifies an individual, group, role, service, or device;
c. Assigning the identifier to the intended individual, group, role, service, or device; and
d. Preventing reuse of identifiers for [Assignment: organization-defined time period].
Discussion: Common device identifiers include Media Access Control (MAC) addresses, Internet
Protocol (IP) addresses, or device-unique token identifiers. The management of individual
identifiers is not applicable to shared system accounts. Typically, individual identifiers are the
usernames of the system accounts assigned to those individuals. In such instances, the account
management activities of AC-2 use account names provided by IA-4. Identifier management also
addresses individual identifiers not necessarily associated with system accounts. Preventing the
reuse of identifiers implies preventing the assignment of previously used individual, group, role,
service, or device identifiers to different individuals, groups, roles, services, or devices.
IDENTIFIER MANAGEMENT | PROHIBIT ACCOUNT IDENTIFIERS AS PUBLIC IDENTIFIERS
Prohibit the use of system account identifiers that are the same as public identifiers for
individual accounts.
Discussion: Prohibiting account identifiers as public identifiers applies to any publicly
disclosed account identifier used for communication such as, electronic mail and instant
messaging. Prohibiting the use of systems account identifiers that are the same as some
public identifier, such as the individual identifier section of an electronic mail address, makes
it more difficult for adversaries to guess user identifiers. Prohibiting account identifiers as
public identifiers without the implementation of other supporting controls only complicates
guessing of identifiers. Additional protections are required for authenticators and credentials
to protect the account.
IDENTIFIER MANAGEMENT | IDENTIFY USER STATUS
Manage individual identifiers by uniquely identifying each individual as [Assignment:
organization-defined characteristic identifying individual status].
Discussion: Characteristics that identify the status of individuals include contractors, foreign
nationals, and non-organizational users. Identifying the status of individuals by these
characteristics provides additional information about the people with whom organizational
personnel are communicating. For example, it might be useful for a government employee
to know that one of the individuals on an email message is a contractor.
IDENTIFIER MANAGEMENT | DYNAMIC MANAGEMENT
Manage individual identifiers dynamically in accordance with [Assignment: organizationdefined dynamic identifier policy].
Discussion: In contrast to conventional approaches to identification that presume static
accounts for preregistered users, many distributed systems establish identifiers at runtime
for entities that were previously unknown. When identifiers are established at runtime for
previously unknown entities, organizations can anticipate and provision for the dynamic
establishment of identifiers. Pre-established trust relationships and mechanisms with
appropriate authorities to validate credentials and related identifiers are essential.
IDENTIFIER MANAGEMENT | CROSS-ORGANIZATION MANAGEMENT
Coordinate with the following external organizations for cross-organization management
of identifiers: [Assignment: organization-defined external organizations].
Discussion: Cross-organization identifier management provides the capability to identify
individuals, groups, roles, or devices when conducting cross-organization activities involving
the processing, storage, or transmission of information.
IDENTIFIER MANAGEMENT | PAIRWISE PSEUDONYMOUS IDENTIFIERS
Generate pairwise pseudonymous identifiers.
Discussion: A pairwise pseudonymous identifier is an opaque unguessable subscriber
identifier generated by an identity provider for use at a specific individual relying party.
Generating distinct pairwise pseudonymous identifiers with no identifying information about
a subscriber discourages subscriber activity tracking and profiling beyond the operational
requirements established by an organization. The pairwise pseudonymous identifiers are
unique to each relying party except in situations where relying parties can show a
demonstrable relationship justifying an operational need for correlation, or all parties
consent to being correlated in such a manner.
IDENTIFIER MANAGEMENT | ATTRIBUTE MAINTENANCE AND PROTECTION
Maintain the attributes for each uniquely identified individual, device, or service in
[Assignment: organization-defined protected central storage].
Discussion: For each of the entities covered in IA-2, IA-3, IA-8, and IA-9, it is important to
maintain the attributes for each authenticated entity on an ongoing basis in a central
(protected) store.
AUTHENTICATOR MANAGEMENT
Control: Manage system authenticators by:
a. Verifying, as part of the initial authenticator distribution, the identity of the individual,
group, role, service, or device receiving the authenticator;
b. Establishing initial authenticator content for any authenticators issued by the organization;
c. Ensuring that authenticators have sufficient strength of mechanism for their intended use;
d. Establishing and implementing administrative procedures for initial authenticator
distribution, for lost or compromised or damaged authenticators, and for revoking
authenticators;
e. Changing default authenticators prior to first use;
f. Changing or refreshing authenticators [Assignment: organization-defined time period by
authenticator type] or when [Assignment: organization-defined events] occur;
g. Protecting authenticator content from unauthorized disclosure and modification;
h. Requiring individuals to take, and having devices implement, specific controls to protect
authenticators; and
i. Changing authenticators for group or role accounts when membership to those accounts
changes.
Discussion: Authenticators include passwords, cryptographic devices, biometrics, certificates,
one-time password devices, and ID badges. Device authenticators include certificates and
passwords. Initial authenticator content is the actual content of the authenticator (e.g., the initial
password). In contrast, the requirements for authenticator content contain specific criteria or
characteristics (e.g., minimum password length). Developers may deliver system components
with factory default authentication credentials (i.e., passwords) to allow for initial installation
and configuration. Default authentication credentials are often well known, easily discoverable,
and present a significant risk. The requirement to protect individual authenticators may be
implemented via control PL-4 or PS-6 for authenticators in the possession of individuals and by
controls AC-3, AC-6, and SC-28 for authenticators stored in organizational systems, including
passwords stored in hashed or encrypted formats or files containing encrypted or hashed
passwords accessible with administrator privileges.
Systems support authenticator management by organization-defined settings and restrictions for
various authenticator characteristics (e.g., minimum password length, validation time window for
time synchronous one-time tokens, and number of allowed rejections during the verification
stage of biometric authentication). Actions can be taken to safeguard individual authenticators,
including maintaining possession of authenticators, not sharing authenticators with others, and
immediately reporting lost, stolen, or compromised authenticators. Authenticator management
includes issuing and revoking authenticators for temporary access when no longer needed.
(1) AUTHENTICATOR MANAGEMENT | PASSWORD-BASED AUTHENTICATION
For password-based authentication:
(a) Maintain a list of commonly-used, expected, or compromised passwords and update
the list [Assignment: organization-defined frequency] and when organizational
passwords are suspected to have been compromised directly or indirectly;
(b) Verify, when users create or update passwords, that the passwords are not found on
the list of commonly-used, expected, or compromised passwords in IA-5(1)(a);
(c) Transmit passwords only over cryptographically-protected channels;
(d) Store passwords using an approved salted key derivation function, preferably using a
keyed hash;
(e) Require immediate selection of a new password upon account recovery;
(f) Allow user selection of long passwords and passphrases, including spaces and all
printable characters;
(g) Employ automated tools to assist the user in selecting strong password
authenticators; and
(h) Enforce the following composition and complexity rules: [Assignment: organizationdefined composition and complexity rules].
Discussion: Password-based authentication applies to passwords regardless of whether they
are used in single-factor or multi-factor authentication. Long passwords or passphrases are
preferable over shorter passwords. Enforced composition rules provide marginal security
benefits while decreasing usability. However, organizations may choose to establish certain
rules for password generation (e.g., minimum character length for long passwords) under
certain circumstances and can enforce this requirement in IA-5(1)(h). Account recovery can
occur, for example, in situations when a password is forgotten. Cryptographically protected
passwords include salted one-way cryptographic hashes of passwords. The list of commonly
used, compromised, or expected passwords includes passwords obtained from previous
breach corpuses, dictionary words, and repetitive or sequential characters. The list includes
context-specific words, such as the name of the service, username, and derivatives thereof
AUTHENTICATOR MANAGEMENT | PUBLIC KEY-BASED AUTHENTICATION
(a) For public key-based authentication:
(1) Enforce authorized access to the corresponding private key; and
(2) Map the authenticated identity to the account of the individual or group; and
(b) When public key infrastructure (PKI) is used:
(1) Validate certificates by constructing and verifying a certification path to an
accepted trust anchor, including checking certificate status information; and
(2) Implement a local cache of revocation data to support path discovery and
validation.
Discussion: Public key cryptography is a valid authentication mechanism for individuals,
machines, and devices. For PKI solutions, status information for certification paths includes
certificate revocation lists or certificate status protocol responses. For PIV cards, certificate
validation involves the construction and verification of a certification path to the Common
Policy Root trust anchor, which includes certificate policy processing. Implementing a local
cache of revocation data to support path discovery and validation also supports system
availability in situations where organizations are unable to access revocation information via
the network
AUTHENTICATOR MANAGEMENT | CHANGE AUTHENTICATORS PRIOR TO DELIVERY
Require developers and installers of system components to provide unique authenticators
or change default authenticators prior to delivery and installation.
Discussion: Changing authenticators prior to the delivery and installation of system
components extends the requirement for organizations to change default authenticators
upon system installation by requiring developers and/or installers to provide unique
authenticators or change default authenticators for system components prior to delivery
and/or installation. However, it typically does not apply to developers of commercial off-theshelf information technology products. Requirements for unique authenticators can be
included in acquisition documents prepared by organizations when procuring systems or
system components.
AUTHENTICATOR MANAGEMENT | PROTECTION OF AUTHENTICATORS
Protect authenticators commensurate with the security category of the information to
which use of the authenticator permits access.
Discussion: For systems that contain multiple security categories of information without
reliable physical or logical separation between categories, authenticators used to grant
access to the systems are protected commensurate with the highest security category of
information on the systems. Security categories of information are determined as part of the
security categorization process.
AUTHENTICATOR MANAGEMENT | NO EMBEDDED UNENCRYPTED STATIC AUTHENTICATORS
Ensure that unencrypted static authenticators are not embedded in applications or other
forms of static storage.
Discussion: In addition to applications, other forms of static storage include access scripts
and function keys. Organizations exercise caution when determining whether embedded or
stored authenticators are in encrypted or unencrypted form. If authenticators are used in
the manner stored, then those representations are considered unencrypted authenticators.
AUTHENTICATOR MANAGEMENT | MULTIPLE SYSTEM ACCOUNTS
Implement [Assignment: organization-defined security controls] to manage the risk of
compromise due to individuals having accounts on multiple systems.
Discussion: When individuals have accounts on multiple systems and use the same
authenticators such as passwords, there is the risk that a compromise of one account may
lead to the compromise of other accounts. Alternative approaches include having different
authenticators (passwords) on all systems, employing a single sign-on or federation
mechanism, or using some form of one-time passwords on all systems. Organizations can
also use rules of behavior (see PL-4) and access agreements (see PS-6) to mitigate the risk of
multiple system accounts.
AUTHENTICATOR MANAGEMENT | FEDERATED CREDENTIAL MANAGEMENT
Use the following external organizations to federate credentials: [Assignment:
organization-defined external organizations].
Discussion: Federation provides organizations with the capability to authenticate individuals
and devices when conducting cross-organization activities involving the processing, storage,
or transmission of information. Using a specific list of approved external organizations for
authentication helps to ensure that those organizations are vetted and trusted.
AUTHENTICATOR MANAGEMENT | DYNAMIC CREDENTIAL BINDING
Bind identities and authenticators dynamically using the following rules: [Assignment:
organization-defined binding rules].
Discussion: Authentication requires some form of binding between an identity and the
authenticator that is used to confirm the identity. In conventional approaches, binding is
established by pre-provisioning both the identity and the authenticator to the system. For
example, the binding between a username (i.e., identity) and a password (i.e., authenticator)
is accomplished by provisioning the identity and authenticator as a pair in the system. New
authentication techniques allow the binding between the identity and the authenticator to
be implemented external to a system. For example, with smartcard credentials, the identity
and authenticator are bound together on the smartcard. Using these credentials, systems
can authenticate identities that have not been pre-provisioned, dynamically provisioning the
identity after authentication. In these situations, organizations can anticipate the dynamic
provisioning of identities. Pre-established trust relationships and mechanisms with
appropriate authorities to validate identities and related credentials are essential.
AUTHENTICATOR MANAGEMENT | BIOMETRIC AUTHENTICATION PERFORMANCE
For biometric-based authentication, employ mechanisms that satisfy the following
biometric quality requirements [Assignment: organization-defined biometric quality
requirements].
Discussion: Unlike password-based authentication, which provides exact matches of userinput passwords to stored passwords, biometric authentication does not provide exact
matches. Depending on the type of biometric and the type of collection mechanism, there is
likely to be some divergence from the presented biometric and the stored biometric that
serves as the basis for comparison. Matching performance is the rate at which a biometric
algorithm correctly results in a match for a genuine user and rejects other users. Biometric
performance requirements include the match rate, which reflects the accuracy of the
biometric matching algorithm used by a system.
AUTHENTICATOR MANAGEMENT | EXPIRATION OF CACHED AUTHENTICATORS
Prohibit the use of cached authenticators after [Assignment: organization-defined time
period].
Discussion: Cached authenticators are used to authenticate to the local machine when the
network is not available. If cached authentication information is out of date, the validity of
the authentication information may be questionable.
AUTHENTICATOR MANAGEMENT | MANAGING CONTENT OF PKI TRUST STORES
For PKI-based authentication, employ an organization-wide methodology for managing the
content of PKI trust stores installed across all platforms, including networks, operating
systems, browsers, and applications.
Discussion: An organization-wide methodology for managing the content of PKI trust stores
helps improve the accuracy and currency of PKI-based authentication credentials across the
organization.
AUTHENTICATOR MANAGEMENT | GSA-APPROVED PRODUCTS AND SERVICES
Use only General Services Administration-approved products and services for identity,
credential, and access management.
Discussion: General Services Administration (GSA)-approved products and services are
products and services that have been approved through the GSA conformance program,
where applicable, and posted to the GSA Approved Products List. GSA provides guidance for
teams to design and build functional and secure systems that comply with Federal Identity,
Credential, and Access Management (FICAM) policies, technologies, and implementation
patterns.
AUTHENTICATOR MANAGEMENT | IN-PERSON OR TRUSTED EXTERNAL PARTY AUTHENTICATOR
ISSUANCE
Require that the issuance of [Assignment: organization-defined types of and/or specific
authenticators] be conducted [Selection: in person; by a trusted external party] before
[Assignment: organization-defined registration authority] with authorization by
[Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles].
Discussion: Issuing authenticators in person or by a trusted external party enhances and
reinforces the trustworthiness of the identity proofing process.
AUTHENTICATOR MANAGEMENT | PRESENTATION ATTACK DETECTION FOR BIOMETRIC
AUTHENTICATORS
Employ presentation attack detection mechanisms for biometric-based authentication.
Discussion: Biometric characteristics do not constitute secrets. Such characteristics can be
obtained by online web accesses, taking a picture of someone with a camera phone to
obtain facial images with or without their knowledge, lifting from objects that someone has
touched (e.g., a latent fingerprint), or capturing a high-resolution image (e.g., an iris
pattern). Presentation attack detection technologies including liveness detection, can
mitigate the risk of these types of attacks by making it difficult to produce artifacts intended
to defeat the biometric sensor
AUTHENTICATOR MANAGEMENT | PASSWORD MANAGERS
(a) Employ [Assignment: organization-defined password managers] to generate and
manage passwords; and
(b) Protect the passwords using [Assignment: organization-defined controls].
Discussion: For systems where static passwords are employed, it is often a challenge to
ensure that the passwords are suitably complex and that the same passwords are not
employed on multiple systems. A password manager is a solution to this problem as it
automatically generates and stores strong and different passwords for various accounts. A
potential risk of using password managers is that adversaries can target the collection of
passwords generated by the password manager. Therefore, the collection of passwords
requires protection including encrypting the passwords (see IA-5(1)(d)) and storing the
collection offline in a token.
IDENTIFICATION AND AUTHENTICATION (NON-ORGANIZATIONAL USERS)
Control: Uniquely identify and authenticate non-organizational users or processes acting on
behalf of non-organizational users.
Discussion: Non-organizational users include system users other than organizational users
explicitly covered by IA-2. Non-organizational users are uniquely identified and authenticated for
accesses other than those explicitly identified and documented in AC-14. Identification and
authentication of non-organizational users accessing federal systems may be required to protect
federal, proprietary, or privacy-related information (with exceptions noted for national security
systems). Organizations consider many factors—including security, privacy, scalability, and
practicality—when balancing the need to ensure ease of use for access to federal information
and systems with the need to protect and adequately mitigate risk.
IDENTIFICATION AND AUTHENTICATION (NON-ORGANIZATIONAL USERS) | ACCEPTANCE OF PIV
CREDENTIALS FROM OTHER AGENCIES
Accept and electronically verify Personal Identity Verification-compliant credentials from
other federal agencies.
Discussion: Acceptance of Personal Identity Verification (PIV) credentials from other federal
agencies applies to both logical and physical access control systems. PIV credentials are
those credentials issued by federal agencies that conform to FIPS Publication 201 and
supporting guidelines. The adequacy and reliability of PIV card issuers are addressed and
authorized using [SP 800-79-2].
IDENTIFICATION AND AUTHENTICATION (NON-ORGANIZATIONAL USERS) | ACCEPTANCE OF EXTERNAL
AUTHENTICATORS
(a) Accept only external authenticators that are NIST-compliant; and
(b) Document and maintain a list of accepted external authenticators.
Discussion: Acceptance of only NIST-compliant external authenticators applies to
organizational systems that are accessible to the public (e.g., public-facing websites).
External authenticators are issued by nonfederal government entities and are compliant
with [SP 800-63B]. Approved external authenticators meet or exceed the minimum Federal
Government-wide technical, security, privacy, and organizational maturity requirements.
Meeting or exceeding Federal requirements allows Federal Government relying parties to
trust external authenticators in connection with an authentication transaction at a specified
authenticator assurance level.
IDENTIFICATION AND AUTHENTICATION (NON-ORGANIZATIONAL USERS) | USE OF DEFINED PROFILES
Conform to the following profiles for identity management [Assignment: organizationdefined identity management profiles].
Discussion: Organizations define profiles for identity management based on open identity
management standards. To ensure that open identity management standards are viable,
robust, reliable, sustainable, and interoperable as documented, the Federal Government
assesses and scopes the standards and technology implementations against applicable laws,
executive orders, directives, policies, regulations, standards, and guidelines.
IDENTIFICATION AND AUTHENTICATION (NON-ORGANIZATIONAL USERS) | ACCEPTANCE OF PIV-I
CREDENTIALS
Accept and verify federated or PKI credentials that meet [Assignment: organizationdefined policy].
Discussion: Acceptance of PIV-I credentials can be implemented by PIV, PIV-I, and other
commercial or external identity providers. The acceptance and verification of PIV-I-compliant
credentials apply to both logical and physical access control systems. The acceptance and
verification of PIV-I credentials address nonfederal issuers of identity cards that desire to
interoperate with United States Government PIV systems and that can be trusted by Federal
Government-relying parties. The X.509 certificate policy for the Federal Bridge Certification
Authority (FBCA) addresses PIV-I requirements. The PIV-I card is commensurate with the PIV
credentials as defined in cited references. PIV-I credentials are the credentials issued by a
PIV-I provider whose PIV-I certificate policy maps to the Federal Bridge PIV-I Certificate
Policy. A PIV-I provider is cross-certified with the FBCA (directly or through another PKI
bridge) with policies that have been mapped and approved as meeting the requirements of
the PIV-I policies defined in the FBCA certificate policy
IDENTIFICATION AND AUTHENTICATION (NON-ORGANIZATIONAL USERS) | DISASSOCIABILITY
Implement the following measures to disassociate user attributes or identifier assertion
relationships among individuals, credential service providers, and relying parties:
[Assignment: organization-defined measures].
Discussion: Federated identity solutions can create increased privacy risks due to the
tracking and profiling of individuals. Using identifier mapping tables or cryptographic
techniques to blind credential service providers and relying parties from each other or to
make identity attributes less visible to transmitting parties can reduce these privacy risks.
SERVICE IDENTIFICATION AND AUTHENTICATION
Control: Uniquely identify and authenticate [Assignment: organization-defined system services
and applications] before establishing communications with devices, users, or other services or
applications.
Discussion: Services that may require identification and authentication include web applications
using digital certificates or services or applications that query a database. Identification and
authentication methods for system services and applications include information or code signing,
provenance graphs, and electronic signatures that indicate the sources of services. Decisions
regarding the validity of identification and authentication claims can be made by services
separate from the services acting on those decisions. This can occur in distributed system
architectures. In such situations, the identification and authentication decisions (instead of actual
identifiers and authentication data) are provided to the services that need to act on those
decisions.
ADAPTIVE AUTHENTICATION
Control: Require individuals accessing the system to employ [Assignment: organization-defined
supplemental authentication techniques or mechanisms] under specific [Assignment:
organization-defined circumstances or situations].
Discussion: Adversaries may compromise individual authentication mechanisms employed by
organizations and subsequently attempt to impersonate legitimate users. To address this threat,
organizations may employ specific techniques or mechanisms and establish protocols to assess
suspicious behavior. Suspicious behavior may include accessing information that individuals do
not typically access as part of their duties, roles, or responsibilities; accessing greater quantities
of information than individuals would routinely access; or attempting to access information from
suspicious network addresses. When pre-established conditions or triggers occur, organizations
can require individuals to provide additional authentication information. Another potential use
for adaptive authentication is to increase the strength of mechanism based on the number or
types of records being accessed. Adaptive authentication does not replace and is not used to
avoid the use of multi-factor authentication mechanisms but can augment implementations of
multi-factor authentication.
RE-AUTHENTICATION
Control: Require users to re-authenticate when [Assignment: organization-defined
circumstances or situations requiring re-authentication].
Discussion: In addition to the re-authentication requirements associated with device locks,
organizations may require re-authentication of individuals in certain situations, including when
roles, authenticators or credentials change, when security categories of systems change, when
the execution of privileged functions occurs, after a fixed time period, or periodically.