PR.AC-3: Remote access is managed
POLICY AND PROCEDURES
Control:
a. Develop, document, and disseminate to [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or
roles]:
1. [Selection (one or more): Organization-level; Mission/business process-level; Systemlevel] access control policy that:
(a) Addresses purpose, scope, roles, responsibilities, management commitment,
coordination among organizational entities, and compliance; and
(b) Is consistent with applicable laws, executive orders, directives, regulations, policies,
standards, and guidelines; and
2. Procedures to facilitate the implementation of the access control policy and the
associated access controls;
b. Designate an [Assignment: organization-defined official] to manage the development,
documentation, and dissemination of the access control policy and procedures; and
c. Review and update the current access control:
1. Policy [Assignment: organization-defined frequency] and following [Assignment:
organization-defined events]; and
2. Procedures [Assignment: organization-defined frequency] and following [Assignment:
organization-defined events].
Discussion: Access control policy and procedures address the controls in the AC family that are
implemented within systems and organizations. The risk management strategy is an important
factor in establishing such policies and procedures. Policies and procedures contribute to security
and privacy assurance. Therefore, it is important that security and privacy programs collaborate
on the development of access control policy and procedures. Security and privacy program
policies and procedures at the organization level are preferable, in general, and may obviate the
need for mission- or system-specific policies and procedures. The policy can be included as part
of the general security and privacy policy or be represented by multiple policies reflecting the
complex nature of organizations. Procedures can be established for security and privacy
programs, for mission or business processes, and for systems, if needed. Procedures describe
how the policies or controls are implemented and can be directed at the individual or role that is
the object of the procedure. Procedures can be documented in system security and privacy plans
or in one or more separate documents. Events that may precipitate an update to access control
policy and procedures include assessment or audit findings, security incidents or breaches, or
changes in laws, executive orders, directives, regulations, policies, standards, and guidelines.
Simply restating controls does not constitute an organizational policy or procedure
REMOTE ACCESS
Control:
a. Establish and document usage restrictions, configuration/connection requirements, and
implementation guidance for each type of remote access allowed; and
b. Authorize each type of remote access to the system prior to allowing such connections.
Discussion: Remote access is access to organizational systems (or processes acting on behalf of
users) that communicate through external networks such as the Internet. Types of remote access
include dial-up, broadband, and wireless. Organizations use encrypted virtual private networks
(VPNs) to enhance confidentiality and integrity for remote connections. The use of encrypted
VPNs provides sufficient assurance to the organization that it can effectively treat such
connections as internal networks if the cryptographic mechanisms used are implemented in
accordance with applicable laws, executive orders, directives, regulations, policies, standards,
and guidelines. Still, VPN connections traverse external networks, and the encrypted VPN does
not enhance the availability of remote connections. VPNs with encrypted tunnels can also affect
the ability to adequately monitor network communications traffic for malicious code. Remote
access controls apply to systems other than public web servers or systems designed for public
access. Authorization of each remote access type addresses authorization prior to allowing
remote access without specifying the specific formats for such authorization. While organizations
may use information exchange and system connection security agreements to manage remote
access connections to other systems, such agreements are addressed as part of CA-3. Enforcing
access restrictions for remote access is addressed via AC-3.
REMOTE ACCESS | MONITORING AND CONTROL
Employ automated mechanisms to monitor and control remote access methods.
Discussion: Monitoring and control of remote access methods allows organizations to
detect attacks and help ensure compliance with remote access policies by auditing the
connection activities of remote users on a variety of system components, including servers,
notebook computers, workstations, smart phones, and tablets. Audit logging for remote
access is enforced by AU-2. Audit events are defined in AU-2a.
REMOTE ACCESS | PROTECTION OF CONFIDENTIALITY AND INTEGRITY USING ENCRYPTION
Implement cryptographic mechanisms to protect the confidentiality and integrity of
remote access sessions.
Discussion: Virtual private networks can be used to protect the confidentiality and integrity
of remote access sessions. Transport Layer Security (TLS) is an example of a cryptographic
protocol that provides end-to-end communications security over networks and is used for
Internet communications and online transactions
REMOTE ACCESS | MANAGED ACCESS CONTROL POINTS
Route remote accesses through authorized and managed network access control points.
Discussion: Organizations consider the Trusted Internet Connections (TIC) initiative [DHS
TIC] requirements for external network connections since limiting the number of access
control points for remote access reduces attack surfaces.
REMOTE ACCESS | PRIVILEGED COMMANDS AND ACCESS
(a) Authorize the execution of privileged commands and access to security-relevant
information via remote access only in a format that provides assessable evidence and
for the following needs: [Assignment: organization-defined needs]; and
(b) Document the rationale for remote access in the security plan for the system.
Discussion: Remote access to systems represents a significant potential vulnerability that
can be exploited by adversaries. As such, restricting the execution of privileged commands
and access to security-relevant information via remote access reduces the exposure of the
organization and the susceptibility to threats by adversaries to the remote access capability
REMOTE ACCESS | MONITORING FOR UNAUTHORIZED CONNECTIONS
REMOTE ACCESS | PROTECTION OF MECHANISM INFORMATION
Protect information about remote access mechanisms from unauthorized use and
disclosure.
Discussion: Remote access to organizational information by non-organizational entities can
increase the risk of unauthorized use and disclosure about remote access mechanisms. The
organization considers including remote access requirements in the information exchange
agreements with other organizations, as applicable. Remote access requirements can also be
included in rules of behavior (see PL-4) and access agreements (see PS-6).
The speed of system disconnect or disablement varies based on the criticality of
missions or business functions and the need to eliminate immediate or future remote access
to systems
REMOTE ACCESS | AUTHENTICATE REMOTE COMMANDS
Implement [Assignment: organization-defined mechanisms] to authenticate [Assignment:
organization-defined remote commands].
Discussion: Authenticating remote commands protects against unauthorized commands and
the replay of authorized commands. The ability to authenticate remote commands is
important for remote systems for which loss, malfunction, misdirection, or exploitation
would have immediate or serious consequences, such as injury, death, property damage,
loss of high value assets, failure of mission or business functions, or compromise of classified
or controlled unclassified information. Authentication mechanisms for remote commands
ensure that systems accept and execute commands in the order intended, execute only
authorized commands, and reject unauthorized commands. Cryptographic mechanisms can
be used, for example, to authenticate remote commands.
ACCESS CONTROL FOR MOBILE DEVICES
Control:
a. Establish configuration requirements, connection requirements, and implementation
guidance for organization-controlled mobile devices, to include when such devices are
outside of controlled areas; and
b. Authorize the connection of mobile devices to organizational systems.
Discussion: A mobile device is a computing device that has a small form factor such that it can
easily be carried by a single individual; is designed to operate without a physical connection;
possesses local, non-removable or removable data storage; and includes a self-contained power
source. Mobile device functionality may also include voice communication capabilities, on-board
sensors that allow the device to capture information, and/or built-in features for synchronizing
local data with remote locations. Examples include smart phones and tablets. Mobile devices are
typically associated with a single individual. The processing, storage, and transmission capability
of the mobile device may be comparable to or merely a subset of notebook/desktop systems,
depending on the nature and intended purpose of the device. Protection and control of mobile
devices is behavior or policy-based and requires users to take physical action to protect and
control such devices when outside of controlled areas. Controlled areas are spaces for which
organizations provide physical or procedural controls to meet the requirements established for
protecting information and systems.
Due to the large variety of mobile devices with different characteristics and capabilities,
organizational restrictions may vary for the different classes or types of such devices. Usage
restrictions and specific implementation guidance for mobile devices include configuration
management, device identification and authentication, implementation of mandatory protective
software, scanning devices for malicious code, updating virus protection software, scanning for
critical software updates and patches, conducting primary operating system (and possibly other
resident software) integrity checks, and disabling unnecessary hardware.
Usage restrictions and authorization to connect may vary among organizational systems. For
example, the organization may authorize the connection of mobile devices to its network and
impose a set of usage restrictions, while a system owner may withhold authorization for mobile
device connection to specific applications or impose additional usage restrictions before allowing
mobile device connections to a system. Adequate security for mobile devices goes beyond the
requirements specified in AC-19. Many safeguards for mobile devices are reflected in other
controls. AC-20 addresses mobile devices that are not organization-controlled.
ACCESS CONTROL FOR MOBILE DEVICES | RESTRICTIONS FOR CLASSIFIED INFORMATION
(a) Prohibit the use of unclassified mobile devices in facilities containing systems
processing, storing, or transmitting classified information unless specifically permitted
by the authorizing official; and
(b) Enforce the following restrictions on individuals permitted by the authorizing official
to use unclassified mobile devices in facilities containing systems processing, storing,
or transmitting classified information:
(1) Connection of unclassified mobile devices to classified systems is prohibited;
(2) Connection of unclassified mobile devices to unclassified systems requires
approval from the authorizing official;
(3) Use of internal or external modems or wireless interfaces within the unclassified
mobile devices is prohibited; and
(4) Unclassified mobile devices and the information stored on those devices are
subject to random reviews and inspections by [Assignment: organization-defined
security officials], and if classified information is found, the incident handling
policy is followed.
(c) Restrict the connection of classified mobile devices to classified systems in accordance
with [Assignment: organization-defined security policies].
ACCESS CONTROL FOR MOBILE DEVICES | FULL DEVICE OR CONTAINER-BASED ENCRYPTION
Employ [Selection: full-device encryption; container-based encryption] to protect the
confidentiality and integrity of information on [Assignment: organization-defined mobile
devices].
Discussion: Container-based encryption provides a more fine-grained approach to data and
information encryption on mobile devices, including encrypting selected data structures
such as files, records, or fields.
USE OF EXTERNAL SYSTEMS
Control:
a. [Selection (one or more): Establish [Assignment: organization-defined terms and conditions];
Identify [Assignment: organization-defined controls asserted to be implemented on external
systems]], consistent with the trust relationships established with other organizations
owning, operating, and/or maintaining external systems, allowing authorized individuals to:
1. Access the system from external systems; and
2. Process, store, or transmit organization-controlled information using external systems;
or
b. Prohibit the use of [Assignment: organizationally-defined types of external systems].
Discussion: External systems are systems that are used by but not part of organizational systems,
and for which the organization has no direct control over the implementation of required
controls or the assessment of control effectiveness. External systems include personally owned
systems, components, or devices; privately owned computing and communications devices in
commercial or public facilities; systems owned or controlled by nonfederal organizations;
systems managed by contractors; and federal information systems that are not owned by,
operated by, or under the direct supervision or authority of the organization. External systems
also include systems owned or operated by other components within the same organization and
systems within the organization with different authorization boundaries. Organizations have the
option to prohibit the use of any type of external system or prohibit the use of specified types of
external systems, (e.g., prohibit the use of any external system that is not organizationally owned
or prohibit the use of personally-owned systems).
For some external systems (i.e., systems operated by other organizations), the trust relationships
that have been established between those organizations and the originating organization may be
such that no explicit terms and conditions are required. Systems within these organizations may
not be considered external. These situations occur when, for example, there are pre-existing
information exchange agreements (either implicit or explicit) established between organizations
or components or when such agreements are specified by applicable laws, executive orders,
directives, regulations, policies, or standards. Authorized individuals include organizational
personnel, contractors, or other individuals with authorized access to organizational systems and
over which organizations have the authority to impose specific rules of behavior regarding
system access. Restrictions that organizations impose on authorized individuals need not be
uniform, as the restrictions may vary depending on trust relationships between organizations.
Therefore, organizations may choose to impose different security restrictions on contractors
than on state, local, or tribal governments.
External systems used to access public interfaces to organizational systems are outside the scope
of AC-20. Organizations establish specific terms and conditions for the use of external systems in
accordance with organizational security policies and procedures. At a minimum, terms and
conditions address the specific types of applications that can be accessed on organizational
systems from external systems and the highest security category of information that can be
processed, stored, or transmitted on external systems. If the terms and conditions with the
owners of the external systems cannot be established, organizations may impose restrictions on
organizational personnel using those external systems.
USE OF EXTERNAL SYSTEMS | LIMITS ON AUTHORIZED USE
Permit authorized individuals to use an external system to access the system or to process,
store, or transmit organization-controlled information only after:
(a) Verification of the implementation of controls on the external system as specified in
the organization’s security and privacy policies and security and privacy plans; or
(b) Retention of approved system connection or processing agreements with the
organizational entity hosting the external system.
Discussion: Limiting authorized use recognizes circumstances where individuals using
external systems may need to access organizational systems. Organizations need assurance
that the external systems contain the necessary controls so as not to compromise, damage,
or otherwise harm organizational systems. Verification that the required controls have been
implemented can be achieved by external, independent assessments, attestations, or other
means, depending on the confidence level required by organizations.
USE OF EXTERNAL SYSTEMS | PORTABLE STORAGE DEVICES — RESTRICTED USE
Restrict the use of organization-controlled portable storage devices by authorized
individuals on external systems using [Assignment: organization-defined restrictions].
Discussion: Limits on the use of organization-controlled portable storage devices in external
systems include restrictions on how the devices may be used and under what conditions the
devices may be used.
USE OF EXTERNAL SYSTEMS | NON-ORGANIZATIONALLY OWNED SYSTEMS — RESTRICTED USE
Restrict the use of non-organizationally owned systems or system components to process,
store, or transmit organizational information using [Assignment: organization-defined
restrictions].
Discussion: Non-organizationally owned systems or system components include systems or
system components owned by other organizations as well as personally owned devices.
There are potential risks to using non-organizationally owned systems or components. In
some cases, the risk is sufficiently high as to prohibit such use (see AC-20 b.). In other cases,
the use of such systems or system components may be allowed but restricted in some way.
Restrictions include requiring the implementation of approved controls prior to authorizing
the connection of non-organizationally owned systems and components; limiting access to
types of information, services, or applications; using virtualization techniques to limit
processing and storage activities to servers or system components provisioned by the
organization; and agreeing to the terms and conditions for usage. Organizations consult with
the Office of the General Counsel regarding legal issues associated with using personally
owned devices, including requirements for conducting forensic analyses during
investigations after an incident.
USE OF EXTERNAL SYSTEMS | NETWORK ACCESSIBLE STORAGE DEVICES — PROHIBITED USE
Prohibit the use of [Assignment: organization-defined network accessible storage devices]
in external systems.
Discussion: Network-accessible storage devices in external systems include online storage
devices in public, hybrid, or community cloud-based systems.
USE OF EXTERNAL SYSTEMS | PORTABLE STORAGE DEVICES — PROHIBITED USE
Prohibit the use of organization-controlled portable storage devices by authorized
individuals on external systems.
Discussion: Limits on the use of organization-controlled portable storage devices in external
systems include a complete prohibition of the use of such devices. Prohibiting such use is
enforced using technical methods and/or nontechnical (i.e., process-based) methods.
COLLABORATIVE COMPUTING DEVICES AND APPLICATIONS
Control:
a. Prohibit remote activation of collaborative computing devices and applications with the
following exceptions: [Assignment: organization-defined exceptions where remote activation
is to be allowed]; and
b. Provide an explicit indication of use to users physically present at the devices.
Discussion: Collaborative computing devices and applications include remote meeting devices
and applications, networked white boards, cameras, and microphones. The explicit indication of
use includes signals to users when collaborative computing devices and applications are
activated
COLLABORATIVE COMPUTING DEVICES | PHYSICAL OR LOGICAL DISCONNECT
Provide [Selection (one or more): physical; logical] disconnect of collaborative computing
devices in a manner that supports ease of use.
Discussion: Failing to disconnect from collaborative computing devices can result in
subsequent compromises of organizational information. Providing easy methods to
disconnect from such devices after a collaborative computing session ensures that
participants carry out the disconnect activity without having to go through complex and
tedious procedures. Disconnect from collaborative computing devices can be manual or
automatic
COLLABORATIVE COMPUTING DEVICES | DISABLING AND REMOVAL IN SECURE WORK AREAS
Disable or remove collaborative computing devices and applications from [Assignment:
organization-defined systems or system components] in [Assignment: organization-defined
secure work areas].
Discussion: Failing to disable or remove collaborative computing devices and applications
from systems or system components can result in compromises of information, including
eavesdropping on conversations. A Sensitive Compartmented Information Facility (SCIF) is
an example of a secure work area.
COLLABORATIVE COMPUTING DEVICES | EXPLICITLY INDICATE CURRENT PARTICIPANTS
Provide an explicit indication of current participants in [Assignment: organization-defined
online meetings and teleconferences].
Discussion: Explicitly indicating current participants prevents unauthorized individuals from
participating in collaborative computing sessions without the explicit knowledge of other
participants.