PR.AC-6: Identities are proofed and bound to credentials and asserted in interactions
POLICY AND PROCEDURES
Control:
a. Develop, document, and disseminate to [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or
roles]:
1. [Selection (one or more): Organization-level; Mission/business process-level; Systemlevel] access control policy that:
(a) Addresses purpose, scope, roles, responsibilities, management commitment,
coordination among organizational entities, and compliance; and
(b) Is consistent with applicable laws, executive orders, directives, regulations, policies,
standards, and guidelines; and
2. Procedures to facilitate the implementation of the access control policy and the
associated access controls;
b. Designate an [Assignment: organization-defined official] to manage the development,
documentation, and dissemination of the access control policy and procedures; and
c. Review and update the current access control:
1. Policy [Assignment: organization-defined frequency] and following [Assignment:
organization-defined events]; and
2. Procedures [Assignment: organization-defined frequency] and following [Assignment:
organization-defined events].
Discussion: Access control policy and procedures address the controls in the AC family that are
implemented within systems and organizations. The risk management strategy is an important
factor in establishing such policies and procedures. Policies and procedures contribute to security
and privacy assurance. Therefore, it is important that security and privacy programs collaborate
on the development of access control policy and procedures. Security and privacy program
policies and procedures at the organization level are preferable, in general, and may obviate the
need for mission- or system-specific policies and procedures. The policy can be included as part
of the general security and privacy policy or be represented by multiple policies reflecting the
complex nature of organizations. Procedures can be established for security and privacy
programs, for mission or business processes, and for systems, if needed. Procedures describe
how the policies or controls are implemented and can be directed at the individual or role that is
the object of the procedure. Procedures can be documented in system security and privacy plans
or in one or more separate documents. Events that may precipitate an update to access control
policy and procedures include assessment or audit findings, security incidents or breaches, or
changes in laws, executive orders, directives, regulations, policies, standards, and guidelines.
Simply restating controls does not constitute an organizational policy or procedure.
ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT
Control:
a. Define and document the types of accounts allowed and specifically prohibited for use
within the system;
b. Assign account managers;
c. Require [Assignment: organization-defined prerequisites and criteria] for group and role
membership;
d. Specify:
1. Authorized users of the system;
2. Group and role membership; and
3. Access authorizations (i.e., privileges) and [Assignment: organization-defined attributes
(as required)] for each account;
e. Require approvals by [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles] for requests to
create accounts;
f. Create, enable, modify, disable, and remove accounts in accordance with [Assignment:
organization-defined policy, procedures, prerequisites, and criteria];
g. Monitor the use of accounts;
h. Notify account managers and [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles] within:
1. [Assignment: organization-defined time period] when accounts are no longer required;
2. [Assignment: organization-defined time period] when users are terminated or
transferred; and
3. [Assignment: organization-defined time period] when system usage or need-to-know
changes for an individual;
i. Authorize access to the system based on:
1. A valid access authorization;
2. Intended system usage; and
3. [Assignment: organization-defined attributes (as required)];
j. Review accounts for compliance with account management requirements [Assignment:
organization-defined frequency];
k. Establish and implement a process for changing shared or group account authenticators (if
deployed) when individuals are removed from the group; and
l. Align account management processes with personnel termination and transfer processes.
Discussion: Examples of system account types include individual, shared, group, system, guest,
anonymous, emergency, developer, temporary, and service. Identification of authorized system
users and the specification of access privileges reflect the requirements in other controls in the
security plan. Users requiring administrative privileges on system accounts receive additional
scrutiny by organizational personnel responsible for approving such accounts and privileged
access, including system owner, mission or business owner, senior agency information security
officer, or senior agency official for privacy. Types of accounts that organizations may wish to
prohibit due to increased risk include shared, group, emergency, anonymous, temporary, and
guest accounts
Where access involves personally identifiable information, security programs collaborate with
the senior agency official for privacy to establish the specific conditions for group and role
membership; specify authorized users, group and role membership, and access authorizations for
each account; and create, adjust, or remove system accounts in accordance with organizational
policies. Policies can include such information as account expiration dates or other factors that
trigger the disabling of accounts. Organizations may choose to define access privileges or other
attributes by account, type of account, or a combination of the two. Examples of other attributes
required for authorizing access include restrictions on time of day, day of week, and point of
origin. In defining other system account attributes, organizations consider system-related
requirements and mission/business requirements. Failure to consider these factors could affect
system availability.
Temporary and emergency accounts are intended for short-term use. Organizations establish
temporary accounts as part of normal account activation procedures when there is a need for
short-term accounts without the demand for immediacy in account activation. Organizations
establish emergency accounts in response to crisis situations and with the need for rapid account
activation. Therefore, emergency account activation may bypass normal account authorization
processes. Emergency and temporary accounts are not to be confused with infrequently used
accounts, including local logon accounts used for special tasks or when network resources are
unavailable (may also be known as accounts of last resort). Such accounts remain available and
are not subject to automatic disabling or removal dates. Conditions for disabling or deactivating
accounts include when shared/group, emergency, or temporary accounts are no longer required
and when individuals are transferred or terminated. Changing shared/group authenticators when
members leave the group is intended to ensure that former group members do not retain access
to the shared or group account. Some types of system accounts may require specialized training.
ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT | AUTOMATED SYSTEM ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT
Support the management of system accounts using [Assignment: organization-defined
automated mechanisms].
Discussion: Automated system account management includes using automated mechanisms
to create, enable, modify, disable, and remove accounts; notify account managers when an
account is created, enabled, modified, disabled, or removed, or when users are terminated
or transferred; monitor system account usage; and report atypical system account usage.
Automated mechanisms can include internal system functions and email, telephonic, and
text messaging notifications.
ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT | AUTOMATED TEMPORARY AND EMERGENCY ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT
Automatically [Selection: remove; disable] temporary and emergency accounts after
[Assignment: organization-defined time period for each type of account].
Discussion: Management of temporary and emergency accounts includes the removal or
disabling of such accounts automatically after a predefined time period rather than at the
convenience of the system administrator. Automatic removal or disabling of accounts
provides a more consistent implementation
ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT | DISABLE ACCOUNTS
Disable accounts within [Assignment: organization-defined time period] when the
accounts:
(a) Have expired;
(b) Are no longer associated with a user or individual;
(c) Are in violation of organizational policy; or
(d) Have been inactive for [Assignment: organization-defined time period].
Discussion: Disabling expired, inactive, or otherwise anomalous accounts supports the
concepts of least privilege and least functionality which reduce the attack surface of the
system.
ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT | AUTOMATED AUDIT ACTIONS
Automatically audit account creation, modification, enabling, disabling, and removal
actions.
Discussion: Account management audit records are defined in accordance with AU-2 and
reviewed, analyzed, and reported in accordance with AU-6.
ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT | INACTIVITY LOGOUT
Require that users log out when [Assignment: organization-defined time period of
expected inactivity or description of when to log out].
Discussion: Inactivity logout is behavior- or policy-based and requires users to take physical
action to log out when they are expecting inactivity longer than the defined period.
Automatic enforcement of inactivity logout is addressed by AC-11.
ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT | DYNAMIC PRIVILEGE MANAGEMENT
Implement [Assignment: organization-defined dynamic privilege management
capabilities].
Discussion: In contrast to access control approaches that employ static accounts and
predefined user privileges, dynamic access control approaches rely on runtime access
control decisions facilitated by dynamic privilege management, such as attribute-based
access control. While user identities remain relatively constant over time, user privileges
typically change more frequently based on ongoing mission or business requirements and
the operational needs of organizations. An example of dynamic privilege management is the
immediate revocation of privileges from users as opposed to requiring that users terminate
and restart their sessions to reflect changes in privileges. Dynamic privilege management can
also include mechanisms that change user privileges based on dynamic rules as opposed to
editing specific user profiles. Examples include automatic adjustments of user privileges if
they are operating out of their normal work times, if their job function or assignment
changes, or if systems are under duress or in emergency situations. Dynamic privilege
management includes the effects of privilege changes, for example, when there are changes
to encryption keys used for communications.
ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT | PRIVILEGED USER ACCOUNTS
(a) Establish and administer privileged user accounts in accordance with [Selection: a rolebased access scheme; an attribute-based access scheme];
(b) Monitor privileged role or attribute assignments;
(c) Monitor changes to roles or attributes; and
(d) Revoke access when privileged role or attribute assignments are no longer
appropriate.
Discussion: Privileged roles are organization-defined roles assigned to individuals that allow
those individuals to perform certain security-relevant functions that ordinary users are not
authorized to perform. Privileged roles include key management, account management,
database administration, system and network administration, and web administration. A
role-based access scheme organizes permitted system access and privileges into roles. In
contrast, an attribute-based access scheme specifies allowed system access and privileges
based on attributes.
ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT | DYNAMIC ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT
Create, activate, manage, and deactivate [Assignment: organization-defined system
accounts] dynamically.
Discussion: Approaches for dynamically creating, activating, managing, and deactivating
system accounts rely on automatically provisioning the accounts at runtime for entities that
were previously unknown. Organizations plan for the dynamic management, creation,
activation, and deactivation of system accounts by establishing trust relationships, business
rules, and mechanisms with appropriate authorities to validate related authorizations and
privileges
ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT | RESTRICTIONS ON USE OF SHARED AND GROUP ACCOUNTS
Only permit the use of shared and group accounts that meet [Assignment: organizationdefined conditions for establishing shared and group accounts].
Discussion: Before permitting the use of shared or group accounts, organizations consider
the increased risk due to the lack of accountability with such accounts.
ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT | USAGE CONDITIONS
Enforce [Assignment: organization-defined circumstances and/or usage conditions] for
[Assignment: organization-defined system accounts].
Discussion: Specifying and enforcing usage conditions helps to enforce the principle of least
privilege, increase user accountability, and enable effective account monitoring. Account
monitoring includes alerts generated if the account is used in violation of organizational
parameters. Organizations can describe specific conditions or circumstances under which
system accounts can be used, such as by restricting usage to certain days of the week, time
of day, or specific durations of time.
ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT | ACCOUNT MONITORING FOR ATYPICAL USAGE
(a) Monitor system accounts for [Assignment: organization-defined atypical usage]; and
(b) Report atypical usage of system accounts to [Assignment: organization-defined
personnel or roles].
Discussion: Atypical usage includes accessing systems at certain times of the day or from
locations that are not consistent with the normal usage patterns of individuals. Monitoring
for atypical usage may reveal rogue behavior by individuals or an attack in progress. Account
monitoring may inadvertently create privacy risks since data collected to identify atypical
usage may reveal previously unknown information about the behavior of individuals.
Organizations assess and document privacy risks from monitoring accounts for atypical
usage in their privacy impact assessment and make determinations that are in alignment
with their privacy program plan.
ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT | DISABLE ACCOUNTS FOR HIGH-RISK INDIVIDUALS
Disable accounts of individuals within [Assignment: organization-defined time period] of
discovery of [Assignment: organization-defined significant risks].
Discussion: Users who pose a significant security and/or privacy risk include individuals for
whom reliable evidence indicates either the intention to use authorized access to systems to
cause harm or through whom adversaries will cause harm. Such harm includes adverse
impacts to organizational operations, organizational assets, individuals, other organizations,
or the Nation. Close coordination among system administrators, legal staff, human resource
managers, and authorizing officials is essential when disabling system accounts for high-risk
individuals
ACCESS ENFORCEMENT
Control: Enforce approved authorizations for logical access to information and system resources
in accordance with applicable access control policies.
Discussion: Access control policies control access between active entities or subjects (i.e., users
or processes acting on behalf of users) and passive entities or objects (i.e., devices, files, records,
domains) in organizational systems. In addition to enforcing authorized access at the system level
and recognizing that systems can host many applications and services in support of mission and
business functions, access enforcement mechanisms can also be employed at the application and
service level to provide increased information security and privacy. In contrast to logical access
controls that are implemented within the system, physical access controls are addressed by the
controls in the Physical and Environmental Protection (PE) family
ACCESS ENFORCEMENT | DUAL AUTHORIZATION
Enforce dual authorization for [Assignment: organization-defined privileged commands
and/or other organization-defined actions].
Discussion: Dual authorization, also known as two-person control, reduces risk related to
insider threats. Dual authorization mechanisms require the approval of two authorized
individuals to execute. To reduce the risk of collusion, organizations consider rotating dual
authorization duties. Organizations consider the risk associated with implementing dual
authorization mechanisms when immediate responses are necessary to ensure public and
environmental safety.
ACCESS ENFORCEMENT | MANDATORY ACCESS CONTROL
Enforce [Assignment: organization-defined mandatory access control policy] over the set
of covered subjects and objects specified in the policy, and where the policy:
(a) Is uniformly enforced across the covered subjects and objects within the system;
(b) Specifies that a subject that has been granted access to information is constrained
from doing any of the following;
(1) Passing the information to unauthorized subjects or objects;
(2) Granting its privileges to other subjects;
(3) Changing one or more security attributes (specified by the policy) on subjects,
objects, the system, or system components;
(4) Choosing the security attributes and attribute values (specified by the policy) to
be associated with newly created or modified objects; and
(5) Changing the rules governing access control; and
(c) Specifies that [Assignment: organization-defined subjects] may explicitly be granted
[Assignment: organization-defined privileges] such that they are not limited by any
defined subset (or all) of the above constraints.
Discussion: Mandatory access control is a type of nondiscretionary access control.
Mandatory access control policies constrain what actions subjects can take with information
obtained from objects for which they have already been granted access. This prevents the
subjects from passing the information to unauthorized subjects and objects. Mandatory
access control policies constrain actions that subjects can take with respect to the
propagation of access control privileges; that is, a subject with a privilege cannot pass that
privilege to other subjects. The policy is uniformly enforced over all subjects and objects to
which the system has control. Otherwise, the access control policy can be circumvented. This
enforcement is provided by an implementation that meets the reference monitor concept as
described in AC-25. The policy is bounded by the system (i.e., once the information is passed
outside of the control of the system, additional means may be required to ensure that the
constraints on the information remain in effect).
The trusted subjects described above are granted privileges consistent with the concept of
least privilege (see AC-6). Trusted subjects are only given the minimum privileges necessary
for satisfying organizational mission/business needs relative to the above policy. The control
is most applicable when there is a mandate that establishes a policy regarding access to
controlled unclassified information or classified information and some users of the system
are not authorized access to all such information resident in the system. Mandatory access
control can operate in conjunction with discretionary access control as described in AC-3(4).
A subject constrained in its operation by mandatory access control policies can still operate
under the less rigorous constraints of AC-3(4), but mandatory access control policies take
precedence over the less rigorous constraints of AC-3(4). For example, while a mandatory
access control policy imposes a constraint that prevents a subject from passing information
to another subject operating at a different impact or classification level, AC-3(4) permits the
subject to pass the information to any other subject with the same impact or classification
level as the subject. Examples of mandatory access control policies include the Bell-LaPadula
policy to protect confidentiality of information and the Biba policy to protect the integrity of
information.
ACCESS ENFORCEMENT | DISCRETIONARY ACCESS CONTROL
Enforce [Assignment: organization-defined discretionary access control policy] over the set
of covered subjects and objects specified in the policy, and where the policy specifies that
a subject that has been granted access to information can do one or more of the following:
(a) Pass the information to any other subjects or objects;
(b) Grant its privileges to other subjects;
(c) Change security attributes on subjects, objects, the system, or the system’s
components;
(d) Choose the security attributes to be associated with newly created or revised objects;
or
(e) Change the rules governing access control.
Discussion: When discretionary access control policies are implemented, subjects are not
constrained with regard to what actions they can take with information for which they have
already been granted access. Thus, subjects that have been granted access to information
are not prevented from passing the information to other subjects or objects (i.e., subjects
have the discretion to pass). Discretionary access control can operate in conjunction with
mandatory access control as described in AC-3(3) and AC-3(15). A subject that is constrained
in its operation by mandatory access control policies can still operate under the less rigorous
constraints of discretionary access control. Therefore, while AC-3(3) imposes constraints that
prevent a subject from passing information to another subject operating at a different
impact or classification level, AC-3(4) permits the subject to pass the information to any
subject at the same impact or classification level. The policy is bounded by the system. Once
the information is passed outside of system control, additional means may be required to
ensure that the constraints remain in effect. While traditional definitions of discretionary
access control require identity-based access control, that limitation is not required for this
particular use of discretionary access control.
ACCESS ENFORCEMENT | SECURITY-RELEVANT INFORMATION
Prevent access to [Assignment: organization-defined security-relevant information] except
during secure, non-operable system states.
Discussion: Security-relevant information is information within systems that can potentially
impact the operation of security functions or the provision of security services in a manner
that could result in failure to enforce system security and privacy policies or maintain the
separation of code and data. Security-relevant information includes access control lists,
filtering rules for routers or firewalls, configuration parameters for security services, and
cryptographic key management information. Secure, non-operable system states include the
times in which systems are not performing mission or business-related processing, such as
when the system is offline for maintenance, boot-up, troubleshooting, or shut down.
ACCESS ENFORCEMENT | PROTECTION OF USER AND SYSTEM INFORMATION
ACCESS ENFORCEMENT | ROLE-BASED ACCESS CONTROL
Enforce a role-based access control policy over defined subjects and objects and control
access based upon [Assignment: organization-defined roles and users authorized to
assume such roles].
Discussion: Role-based access control (RBAC) is an access control policy that enforces access
to objects and system functions based on the defined role (i.e., job function) of the subject.
Organizations can create specific roles based on job functions and the authorizations (i.e.,
privileges) to perform needed operations on the systems associated with the organizationdefined roles. When users are assigned to specific roles, they inherit the authorizations or
privileges defined for those roles. RBAC simplifies privilege administration for organizations
because privileges are not assigned directly to every user (which can be a large number of
individuals) but are instead acquired through role assignments. RBAC can also increase
privacy and security risk if individuals assigned to a role are given access to information
beyond what they need to support organizational missions or business functions. RBAC can
be implemented as a mandatory or discretionary form of access control. For organizations
implementing RBAC with mandatory access controls, the requirements in AC-3(3) define the
scope of the subjects and objects covered by the policy.
ACCESS ENFORCEMENT | REVOCATION OF ACCESS AUTHORIZATIONS
Enforce the revocation of access authorizations resulting from changes to the security
attributes of subjects and objects based on [Assignment: organization-defined rules
governing the timing of revocations of access authorizations].
Discussion: Revocation of access rules may differ based on the types of access revoked. For
example, if a subject (i.e., user or process acting on behalf of a user) is removed from a
group, access may not be revoked until the next time the object is opened or the next time
the subject attempts to access the object. Revocation based on changes to security labels
may take effect immediately. Organizations provide alternative approaches on how to make
revocations immediate if systems cannot provide such capability and immediate revocation
is necessary.
ACCESS ENFORCEMENT | CONTROLLED RELEASE
Release information outside of the system only if:
(a) The receiving [Assignment: organization-defined system or system component]
provides [Assignment: organization-defined controls]; and
(b) [Assignment: organization-defined controls] are used to validate the appropriateness
of the information designated for release.
Discussion: Organizations can only directly protect information when it resides within the
system. Additional controls may be needed to ensure that organizational information is
adequately protected once it is transmitted outside of the system. In situations where the
system is unable to determine the adequacy of the protections provided by external entities,
as a mitigation measure, organizations procedurally determine whether the external systems
are providing adequate controls. The means used to determine the adequacy of controls
provided by external systems include conducting periodic assessments (inspections/tests),
establishing agreements between the organization and its counterpart organizations, or
some other process. The means used by external entities to protect the information received
need not be the same as those used by the organization, but the means employed are
sufficient to provide consistent adjudication of the security and privacy policy to protect the
information and individuals’ privacy.
Controlled release of information requires systems to implement technical or procedural
means to validate the information prior to releasing it to external systems. For example, if
the system passes information to a system controlled by another organization, technical
means are employed to validate that the security and privacy attributes associated with the
exported information are appropriate for the receiving system. Alternatively, if the system
passes information to a printer in organization-controlled space, procedural means can be
employed to ensure that only authorized individuals gain access to the printer.
ACCESS ENFORCEMENT | AUDITED OVERRIDE OF ACCESS CONTROL MECHANISMS
Employ an audited override of automated access control mechanisms under [Assignment:
organization-defined conditions] by [Assignment: organization-defined roles].
Discussion: In certain situations, such as when there is a threat to human life or an event
that threatens the organization’s ability to carry out critical missions or business functions,
an override capability for access control mechanisms may be needed. Override conditions
are defined by organizations and used only in those limited circumstances. Audit events are
defined in AU-2. Audit records are generated in AU-12.
ACCESS ENFORCEMENT | RESTRICT ACCESS TO SPECIFIC INFORMATION TYPES
Restrict access to data repositories containing [Assignment: organization-defined
information types].
Discussion: Restricting access to specific information is intended to provide flexibility
regarding access control of specific information types within a system. For example, rolebased access could be employed to allow access to only a specific type of personally
identifiable information within a database rather than allowing access to the database in its
entirety. Other examples include restricting access to cryptographic keys, authentication
information, and selected system information.
ACCESS ENFORCEMENT | ASSERT AND ENFORCE APPLICATION ACCESS
(a) Require applications to assert, as part of the installation process, the access needed to
the following system applications and functions: [Assignment: organization-defined
system applications and functions];
(b) Provide an enforcement mechanism to prevent unauthorized access; and
(c) Approve access changes after initial installation of the application.
Discussion: Asserting and enforcing application access is intended to address applications
that need to access existing system applications and functions, including user contacts,
global positioning systems, cameras, keyboards, microphones, networks, phones, or other
files.
ACCESS ENFORCEMENT | ATTRIBUTE-BASED ACCESS CONTROL
Enforce attribute-based access control policy over defined subjects and objects and control
access based upon [Assignment: organization-defined attributes to assume access
permissions].
Discussion: Attribute-based access control is an access control policy that restricts system
access to authorized users based on specified organizational attributes (e.g., job function,
identity), action attributes (e.g., read, write, delete), environmental attributes (e.g., time of
day, location), and resource attributes (e.g., classification of a document). Organizations can
create rules based on attributes and the authorizations (i.e., privileges) to perform needed
operations on the systems associated with organization-defined attributes and rules. When
users are assigned to attributes defined in attribute-based access control policies or rules,
they can be provisioned to a system with the appropriate privileges or dynamically granted
access to a protected resource. Attribute-based access control can be implemented as either
a mandatory or discretionary form of access control. When implemented with mandatory
access controls, the requirements in AC-3(3) define the scope of the subjects and objects
covered by the policy.
ACCESS ENFORCEMENT | INDIVIDUAL ACCESS
Provide [Assignment: organization-defined mechanisms] to enable individuals to have
access to the following elements of their personally identifiable information: [Assignment:
organization-defined elements].
Discussion: Individual access affords individuals the ability to review personally identifiable
information about them held within organizational records, regardless of format. Access
helps individuals to develop an understanding about how their personally identifiable
information is being processed. It can also help individuals ensure that their data is accurate.
Access mechanisms can include request forms and application interfaces. For federal
agencies, [PRIVACT] processes can be located in systems of record notices and on agency
websites. Access to certain types of records may not be appropriate (e.g., for federal
agencies, law enforcement records within a system of records may be exempt from
disclosure under the [PRIVACT]) or may require certain levels of authentication assurance.
Organizational personnel consult with the senior agency official for privacy and legal counsel
to determine appropriate mechanisms and access rights or limitations
ACCESS ENFORCEMENT | DISCRETIONARY AND MANDATORY ACCESS CONTROL
(a) Enforce [Assignment: organization-defined mandatory access control policy] over the
set of covered subjects and objects specified in the policy; and
(b) Enforce [Assignment: organization-defined discretionary access control policy] over
the set of covered subjects and objects specified in the policy.
Discussion: Simultaneously implementing a mandatory access control policy and a
discretionary access control policy can provide additional protection against the
unauthorized execution of code by users or processes acting on behalf of users. This helps
prevent a single compromised user or process from compromising the entire system.
SECURITY AND PRIVACY ATTRIBUTES
Control:
a. Provide the means to associate [Assignment: organization-defined types of security and
privacy attributes] with [Assignment: organization-defined security and privacy attribute
values] for information in storage, in process, and/or in transmission;
b. Ensure that the attribute associations are made and retained with the information;
c. Establish the following permitted security and privacy attributes from the attributes defined
in AC-16a for [Assignment: organization-defined systems]: [Assignment: organization-defined
security and privacy attributes];
d. Determine the following permitted attribute values or ranges for each of the established
attributes: [Assignment: organization-defined attribute values or ranges for established
attributes];
e. Audit changes to attributes; and
f. Review [Assignment: organization-defined security and privacy attributes] for applicability
[Assignment: organization-defined frequency].
Discussion: Information is represented internally within systems using abstractions known as
data structures. Internal data structures can represent different types of entities, both active and
passive. Active entities, also known as subjects, are typically associated with individuals, devices,
or processes acting on behalf of individuals. Passive entities, also known as objects, are typically
associated with data structures, such as records, buffers, tables, files, inter-process pipes, and
communications ports. Security attributes, a form of metadata, are abstractions that represent
the basic properties or characteristics of active and passive entities with respect to safeguarding
information. Privacy attributes, which may be used independently or in conjunction with security
attributes, represent the basic properties or characteristics of active or passive entities with
respect to the management of personally identifiable information. Attributes can be either
explicitly or implicitly associated with the information contained in organizational systems or
system components.
Attributes may be associated with active entities (i.e., subjects) that have the potential to send or
receive information, cause information to flow among objects, or change the system state. These
attributes may also be associated with passive entities (i.e., objects) that contain or receive
information. The association of attributes to subjects and objects by a system is referred to as
binding and is inclusive of setting the attribute value and the attribute type. Attributes, when
bound to data or information, permit the enforcement of security and privacy policies for access
control and information flow control, including data retention limits, permitted uses of
personally identifiable information, and identification of personal information within data
objects. Such enforcement occurs through organizational processes or system functions or
mechanisms. The binding techniques implemented by systems affect the strength of attribute
binding to information. Binding strength and the assurance associated with binding techniques
play important parts in the trust that organizations have in the information flow enforcement
process. The binding techniques affect the number and degree of additional reviews required by
organizations. The content or assigned values of attributes can directly affect the ability of
individuals to access organizational information.
Organizations can define the types of attributes needed for systems to support missions or
business functions. There are many values that can be assigned to a security attribute. By
specifying the permitted attribute ranges and values, organizations ensure that attribute values
are meaningful and relevant. Labeling refers to the association of attributes with the subjects
and objects represented by the internal data structures within systems. This facilitates systembased enforcement of information security and privacy policies. Labels include classification of
information in accordance with legal and compliance requirements (e.g., top secret, secret,
confidential, controlled unclassified), information impact level; high value asset information,
access authorizations, nationality; data life cycle protection (i.e., encryption and data expiration),
personally identifiable information processing permissions, including individual consent to
personally identifiable information processing, and contractor affiliation. A related term to
labeling is marking. Marking refers to the association of attributes with objects in a humanreadable form and displayed on system media. Marking enables manual, procedural, or processbased enforcement of information security and privacy policies. Security and privacy labels may
have the same value as media markings (e.g., top secret, secret, confidential). See MP-3 (Media
Marking).
SECURITY AND PRIVACY ATTRIBUTES | DYNAMIC ATTRIBUTE ASSOCIATION
Dynamically associate security and privacy attributes with [Assignment: organizationdefined subjects and objects] in accordance with the following security and privacy policies
as information is created and combined: [Assignment: organization-defined security and
privacy policies].
Discussion: Dynamic association of attributes is appropriate whenever the security or
privacy characteristics of information change over time. Attributes may change due to
information aggregation issues (i.e., characteristics of individual data elements are different
from the combined elements), changes in individual access authorizations (i.e., privileges),
changes in the security category of information, or changes in security or privacy policies.
Attributes may also change situationally.
SECURITY AND PRIVACY ATTRIBUTES | ATTRIBUTE VALUE CHANGES BY AUTHORIZED INDIVIDUALS
Provide authorized individuals (or processes acting on behalf of individuals) the capability
to define or change the value of associated security and privacy attributes.
Discussion: The content or assigned values of attributes can directly affect the ability of
individuals to access organizational information. Therefore, it is important for systems to be
able to limit the ability to create or modify attributes to authorized individuals.
SECURITY AND PRIVACY ATTRIBUTES | MAINTENANCE OF ATTRIBUTE ASSOCIATIONS BY SYSTEM
Maintain the association and integrity of [Assignment: organization-defined security and
privacy attributes] to [Assignment: organization-defined subjects and objects].
Discussion: Maintaining the association and integrity of security and privacy attributes to
subjects and objects with sufficient assurance helps to ensure that the attribute associations
can be used as the basis of automated policy actions. The integrity of specific items, such as
security configuration files, may be maintained through the use of an integrity monitoring
mechanism that detects anomalies and changes that deviate from “known good” baselines.
Automated policy actions include retention date expirations, access control decisions,
information flow control decisions, and information disclosure decisions.
SECURITY AND PRIVACY ATTRIBUTES | ASSOCIATION OF ATTRIBUTES BY AUTHORIZED INDIVIDUALS
Provide the capability to associate [Assignment: organization-defined security and privacy
attributes] with [Assignment: organization-defined subjects and objects] by authorized
individuals (or processes acting on behalf of individuals).
Discussion: Systems, in general, provide the capability for privileged users to assign security
and privacy attributes to system-defined subjects (e.g., users) and objects (e.g., directories,
files, and ports). Some systems provide additional capability for general users to assign
security and privacy attributes to additional objects (e.g., files, emails). The association of
attributes by authorized individuals is described in the design documentation. The support
provided by systems can include prompting users to select security and privacy attributes to
be associated with information objects, employing automated mechanisms to categorize
information with attributes based on defined policies, or ensuring that the combination of
the security or privacy attributes selected is valid. Organizations consider the creation,
deletion, or modification of attributes when defining auditable events.
SECURITY AND PRIVACY ATTRIBUTES | ATTRIBUTE DISPLAYS ON OBJECTS TO BE OUTPUT
Display security and privacy attributes in human-readable form on each object that the
system transmits to output devices to identify [Assignment: organization-defined special
dissemination, handling, or distribution instructions] using [Assignment: organizationdefined human-readable, standard naming conventions].
Discussion: System outputs include printed pages, screens, or equivalent items. System
output devices include printers, notebook computers, video displays, smart phones, and
tablets. To mitigate the risk of unauthorized exposure of information (e.g., shoulder surfing),
the outputs display full attribute values when unmasked by the subscriber.
SECURITY AND PRIVACY ATTRIBUTES | MAINTENANCE OF ATTRIBUTE ASSOCIATION
Require personnel to associate and maintain the association of [Assignment: organizationdefined security and privacy attributes] with [Assignment: organization-defined subjects
and objects] in accordance with [Assignment: organization-defined security and privacy
policies].
Discussion: Maintaining attribute association requires individual users (as opposed to the
system) to maintain associations of defined security and privacy attributes with subjects and
objects.
SECURITY AND PRIVACY ATTRIBUTES | CONSISTENT ATTRIBUTE INTERPRETATION
Provide a consistent interpretation of security and privacy attributes transmitted between
distributed system components.
Discussion: To enforce security and privacy policies across multiple system components in
distributed systems, organizations provide a consistent interpretation of security and privacy
attributes employed in access enforcement and flow enforcement decisions. Organizations
can establish agreements and processes to help ensure that distributed system components
implement attributes with consistent interpretations in automated access enforcement and
flow enforcement actions.
SECURITY AND PRIVACY ATTRIBUTES | ASSOCIATION TECHNIQUES AND TECHNOLOGIES
Implement [Assignment: organization-defined techniques and technologies] in associating
security and privacy attributes to information.
Discussion: The association of security and privacy attributes to information within systems
is important for conducting automated access enforcement and flow enforcement actions.
The association of such attributes to information (i.e., binding) can be accomplished with
technologies and techniques that provide different levels of assurance. For example, systems
can cryptographically bind attributes to information using digital signatures that support
cryptographic keys protected by hardware devices (sometimes known as hardware roots of
trust).
SECURITY AND PRIVACY ATTRIBUTES | ATTRIBUTE REASSIGNMENT — REGRADING MECHANISMS
Change security and privacy attributes associated with information only via regrading
mechanisms validated using [Assignment: organization-defined techniques or procedures].
Discussion: A regrading mechanism is a trusted process authorized to re-classify and re-label
data in accordance with a defined policy exception. Validated regrading mechanisms are
used by organizations to provide the requisite levels of assurance for attribute reassignment
activities. The validation is facilitated by ensuring that regrading mechanisms are single
purpose and of limited function. Since security and privacy attribute changes can directly
affect policy enforcement actions, implementing trustworthy regrading mechanisms is
necessary to help ensure that such mechanisms perform in a consistent and correct mode of
operation.
SECURITY AND PRIVACY ATTRIBUTES | ATTRIBUTE CONFIGURATION BY AUTHORIZED INDIVIDUALS
Provide authorized individuals the capability to define or change the type and value of
security and privacy attributes available for association with subjects and objects.
Discussion: The content or assigned values of security and privacy attributes can directly
affect the ability of individuals to access organizational information. Thus, it is important for
systems to be able to limit the ability to create or modify the type and value of attributes
available for association with subjects and objects to authorized individuals only.
ACCESS CONTROL FOR MOBILE DEVICES
Control:
a. Establish configuration requirements, connection requirements, and implementation
guidance for organization-controlled mobile devices, to include when such devices are
outside of controlled areas; and
b. Authorize the connection of mobile devices to organizational systems.
Discussion: A mobile device is a computing device that has a small form factor such that it can
easily be carried by a single individual; is designed to operate without a physical connection;
possesses local, non-removable or removable data storage; and includes a self-contained power
source. Mobile device functionality may also include voice communication capabilities, on-board
sensors that allow the device to capture information, and/or built-in features for synchronizing
local data with remote locations. Examples include smart phones and tablets. Mobile devices are
typically associated with a single individual. The processing, storage, and transmission capability
of the mobile device may be comparable to or merely a subset of notebook/desktop systems,
depending on the nature and intended purpose of the device. Protection and control of mobile
devices is behavior or policy-based and requires users to take physical action to protect and
control such devices when outside of controlled areas. Controlled areas are spaces for which
organizations provide physical or procedural controls to meet the requirements established for
protecting information and systems.
Due to the large variety of mobile devices with different characteristics and capabilities,
organizational restrictions may vary for the different classes or types of such devices. Usage
restrictions and specific implementation guidance for mobile devices include configuration
management, device identification and authentication, implementation of mandatory protective
software, scanning devices for malicious code, updating virus protection software, scanning for
critical software updates and patches, conducting primary operating system (and possibly other
resident software) integrity checks, and disabling unnecessary hardware.
Usage restrictions and authorization to connect may vary among organizational systems. For
example, the organization may authorize the connection of mobile devices to its network and
impose a set of usage restrictions, while a system owner may withhold authorization for mobile
device connection to specific applications or impose additional usage restrictions before allowing
mobile device connections to a system. Adequate security for mobile devices goes beyond the
requirements specified in AC-19. Many safeguards for mobile devices are reflected in other
controls. AC-20 addresses mobile devices that are not organization-controlled.
ACCESS CONTROL FOR MOBILE DEVICES | RESTRICTIONS FOR CLASSIFIED INFORMATION
(a) Prohibit the use of unclassified mobile devices in facilities containing systems
processing, storing, or transmitting classified information unless specifically permitted
by the authorizing official; and
(b) Enforce the following restrictions on individuals permitted by the authorizing official
to use unclassified mobile devices in facilities containing systems processing, storing,
or transmitting classified information:
(1) Connection of unclassified mobile devices to classified systems is prohibited;
(2) Connection of unclassified mobile devices to unclassified systems requires
approval from the authorizing official;
(3) Use of internal or external modems or wireless interfaces within the unclassified
mobile devices is prohibited; and
(4) Unclassified mobile devices and the information stored on those devices are
subject to random reviews and inspections by [Assignment: organization-defined
security officials], and if classified information is found, the incident handling
policy is followed.
(c) Restrict the connection of classified mobile devices to classified systems in accordance
with [Assignment: organization-defined security policies].
ACCESS CONTROL FOR MOBILE DEVICES | FULL DEVICE OR CONTAINER-BASED ENCRYPTION
Employ [Selection: full-device encryption; container-based encryption] to protect the
confidentiality and integrity of information on [Assignment: organization-defined mobile
devices].
Discussion: Container-based encryption provides a more fine-grained approach to data and
information encryption on mobile devices, including encrypting selected data structures
such as files, records, or fields.
ACCESS CONTROL DECISIONS
Control: [Selection: Establish procedures; Implement mechanisms] to ensure [Assignment:
organization-defined access control decisions] are applied to each access request prior to access
enforcement.
Discussion: Access control decisions (also known as authorization decisions) occur when
authorization information is applied to specific accesses. In contrast, access enforcement occurs
when systems enforce access control decisions. While it is common to have access control
decisions and access enforcement implemented by the same entity, it is not required, and it is
not always an optimal implementation choice. For some architectures and distributed systems,
different entities may make access control decisions and enforce access.
ACCESS CONTROL DECISIONS | TRANSMIT ACCESS AUTHORIZATION INFORMATION
Transmit [Assignment: organization-defined access authorization information] using
[Assignment: organization-defined controls] to [Assignment: organization-defined
systems] that enforce access control decisions.
Discussion: Authorization processes and access control decisions may occur in separate
parts of systems or in separate systems. In such instances, authorization information is
transmitted securely (e.g., using cryptographic mechanisms) so that timely access control
decisions can be enforced at the appropriate locations. To support the access control
decisions, it may be necessary to transmit as part of the access authorization information
supporting security and privacy attributes. This is because in distributed systems, there are
various access control decisions that need to be made, and different entities make these
decisions in a serial fashion, each requiring those attributes to make the decisions.
Protecting access authorization information ensures that such information cannot be
altered, spoofed, or compromised during transmission.
ACCESS CONTROL DECISIONS | NO USER OR PROCESS IDENTITY
Enforce access control decisions based on [Assignment: organization-defined security or
privacy attributes] that do not include the identity of the user or process acting on behalf
of the user.
Discussion: In certain situations, it is important that access control decisions can be made
without information regarding the identity of the users issuing the requests. These are
generally instances where preserving individual privacy is of paramount importance. In other
situations, user identification information is simply not needed for access control decisions,
and especially in the case of distributed systems, transmitting such information with the
needed degree of assurance may be very expensive or difficult to accomplish. MAC, RBAC,
ABAC, and label-based control policies, for example, might not include user identity as an
attribute.
POLICY AND PROCEDURES
Control:
a. Develop, document, and disseminate to [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or
roles]:
1. [Selection (one or more): Organization-level; Mission/business process-level; Systemlevel] identification and authentication policy that:
(a) Addresses purpose, scope, roles, responsibilities, management commitment,
coordination among organizational entities, and compliance; and
(b) Is consistent with applicable laws, executive orders, directives, regulations, policies,
standards, and guidelines; and
2. Procedures to facilitate the implementation of the identification and authentication
policy and the associated identification and authentication controls;
b. Designate an [Assignment: organization-defined official] to manage the development,
documentation, and dissemination of the identification and authentication policy and
procedures; and
c. Review and update the current identification and authentication:
1. Policy [Assignment: organization-defined frequency] and following [Assignment:
organization-defined events]; and
2. Procedures [Assignment: organization-defined frequency] and following [Assignment:
organization-defined events].
Discussion: Identification and authentication policy and procedures address the controls in the
IA family that are implemented within systems and organizations. The risk management strategy
is an important factor in establishing such policies and procedures. Policies and procedures
contribute to security and privacy assurance. Therefore, it is important that security and privacy
programs collaborate on the development of identification and authentication policy and
procedures. Security and privacy program policies and procedures at the organization level are
preferable, in general, and may obviate the need for mission- or system-specific policies and
procedures. The policy can be included as part of the general security and privacy policy or be
represented by multiple policies that reflect the complex nature of organizations. Procedures can
be established for security and privacy programs, for mission or business processes, and for
systems, if needed. Procedures describe how the policies or controls are implemented and can
be directed at the individual or role that is the object of the procedure. Procedures can be
documented in system security and privacy plans or in one or more separate documents. Events
that may precipitate an update to identification and authentication policy and procedures
include assessment or audit findings, security incidents or breaches, or changes in applicable
laws, executive orders, directives, regulations, policies, standards, and guidelines. Simply
restating controls does not constitute an organizational policy or procedure.
IDENTIFICATION AND AUTHENTICATION (ORGANIZATIONAL USERS)
Control: Uniquely identify and authenticate organizational users and associate that unique
identification with processes acting on behalf of those users.
Discussion: Organizations can satisfy the identification and authentication requirements by
complying with the requirements in [HSPD 12]. Organizational users include employees or
individuals who organizations consider to have an equivalent status to employees (e.g.,
contractors and guest researchers). Unique identification and authentication of users applies to
all accesses other than those that are explicitly identified in AC-14 and that occur through the
authorized use of group authenticators without individual authentication. Since processes
execute on behalf of groups and roles, organizations may require unique identification of
individuals in group accounts or for detailed accountability of individual activity.
Organizations employ passwords, physical authenticators, or biometrics to authenticate user
identities or, in the case of multi-factor authentication, some combination thereof. Access to
organizational systems is defined as either local access or network access. Local access is any
access to organizational systems by users or processes acting on behalf of users, where access is
obtained through direct connections without the use of networks. Network access is access to
organizational systems by users (or processes acting on behalf of users) where access is obtained
through network connections (i.e., nonlocal accesses). Remote access is a type of network access
that involves communication through external networks. Internal networks include local area
networks and wide area networks.
The use of encrypted virtual private networks for network connections between organizationcontrolled endpoints and non-organization-controlled endpoints may be treated as internal
networks with respect to protecting the confidentiality and integrity of information traversing
the network. Identification and authentication requirements for non-organizational users are
described in IA-8.
IDENTIFICATION AND AUTHENTICATION (ORGANIZATIONAL USERS) | MULTI-FACTOR
AUTHENTICATION TO PRIVILEGED ACCOUNTS
Implement multi-factor authentication for access to privileged accounts.
Discussion: Multi-factor authentication requires the use of two or more different factors to
achieve authentication. The authentication factors are defined as follows: something you
know (e.g., a personal identification number [PIN]), something you have (e.g., a physical
authenticator such as a cryptographic private key), or something you are (e.g., a biometric).
Multi-factor authentication solutions that feature physical authenticators include hardware
authenticators that provide time-based or challenge-response outputs and smart cards such
as the U.S. Government Personal Identity Verification (PIV) card or the Department of
Defense (DoD) Common Access Card (CAC). In addition to authenticating users at the system
level (i.e., at logon), organizations may employ authentication mechanisms at the application
level, at their discretion, to provide increased security. Regardless of the type of access (i.e.,
local, network, remote), privileged accounts are authenticated using multi-factor options
appropriate for the level of risk. Organizations can add additional security measures, such as
additional or more rigorous authentication mechanisms, for specific types of access.
IDENTIFICATION AND AUTHENTICATION (ORGANIZATIONAL USERS) | MULTI-FACTOR
AUTHENTICATION TO NON-PRIVILEGED ACCOUNTS
Implement multi-factor authentication for access to non-privileged accounts.
Discussion: Multi-factor authentication requires the use of two or more different factors to
achieve authentication. The authentication factors are defined as follows: something you
know (e.g., a personal identification number [PIN]), something you have (e.g., a physical
authenticator such as a cryptographic private key), or something you are (e.g., a biometric).
Multi-factor authentication solutions that feature physical authenticators include hardware
authenticators that provide time-based or challenge-response outputs and smart cards such
as the U.S. Government Personal Identity Verification card or the DoD Common Access Card.
In addition to authenticating users at the system level, organizations may also employ
authentication mechanisms at the application level, at their discretion, to provide increased
information security. Regardless of the type of access (i.e., local, network, remote), nonprivileged accounts are authenticated using multi-factor options appropriate for the level of
risk. Organizations can provide additional security measures, such as additional or more
rigorous authentication mechanisms, for specific types of access.
IDENTIFICATION AND AUTHENTICATION (ORGANIZATIONAL USERS) | INDIVIDUAL AUTHENTICATION
WITH GROUP AUTHENTICATION
When shared accounts or authenticators are employed, require users to be individually
authenticated before granting access to the shared accounts or resources.
Discussion: Individual authentication prior to shared group authentication mitigates the risk
of using group accounts or authenticators.
IDENTIFICATION AND AUTHENTICATION (ORGANIZATIONAL USERS) | ACCESS TO ACCOUNTS —
SEPARATE DEVICE
Implement multi-factor authentication for [Selection (one or more): local; network;
remote] access to [Selection (one or more): privileged accounts; non-privileged accounts]
such that:
(a) One of the factors is provided by a device separate from the system gaining access;
and
(b) The device meets [Assignment: organization-defined strength of mechanism
requirements].
Discussion: The purpose of requiring a device that is separate from the system to which the
user is attempting to gain access for one of the factors during multi-factor authentication is
to reduce the likelihood of compromising authenticators or credentials stored on the
system. Adversaries may be able to compromise such authenticators or credentials and
subsequently impersonate authorized users. Implementing one of the factors on a separate
device (e.g., a hardware token), provides a greater strength of mechanism and an increased
level of assurance in the authentication process.
IDENTIFICATION AND AUTHENTICATION (ORGANIZATIONAL USERS) | ACCESS TO ACCOUNTS —
REPLAY RESISTANT
Implement replay-resistant authentication mechanisms for access to [Selection (one or
more): privileged accounts; non-privileged accounts].
Discussion: Authentication processes resist replay attacks if it is impractical to achieve
successful authentications by replaying previous authentication messages. Replay-resistant
techniques include protocols that use nonces or challenges such as time synchronous or
cryptographic authenticators.
IDENTIFICATION AND AUTHENTICATION (ORGANIZATIONAL USERS) | SINGLE SIGN-ON
Provide a single sign-on capability for [Assignment: organization-defined system accounts
and services].
Discussion: Single sign-on enables users to log in once and gain access to multiple system
resources. Organizations consider the operational efficiencies provided by single sign-on
capabilities with the risk introduced by allowing access to multiple systems via a single
authentication event. Single sign-on can present opportunities to improve system security,
for example by providing the ability to add multi-factor authentication for applications and
systems (existing and new) that may not be able to natively support multi-factor
authentication.
IDENTIFICATION AND AUTHENTICATION (ORGANIZATIONAL USERS) | ACCEPTANCE OF PIV
CREDENTIALS
Accept and electronically verify Personal Identity Verification-compliant credentials.
Discussion: Acceptance of Personal Identity Verification (PIV)-compliant credentials applies
to organizations implementing logical access control and physical access control systems.
PIV-compliant credentials are those credentials issued by federal agencies that conform to
FIPS Publication 201 and supporting guidance documents. The adequacy and reliability of PIV
card issuers are authorized using [SP 800-79-2]. Acceptance of PIV-compliant credentials
includes derived PIV credentials, the use of which is addressed in [SP 800-166]. The DOD
Common Access Card (CAC) is an example of a PIV credential.
IDENTIFICATION AND AUTHENTICATION (ORGANIZATIONAL USERS) | OUT-OF-BAND
AUTHENTICATION
Implement the following out-of-band authentication mechanisms under [Assignment:
organization-defined conditions]: [Assignment: organization-defined out-of-band
authentication].
Discussion: Out-of-band authentication refers to the use of two separate communication
paths to identify and authenticate users or devices to an information system. The first path
(i.e., the in-band path) is used to identify and authenticate users or devices and is generally
the path through which information flows. The second path (i.e., the out-of-band path) is
used to independently verify the authentication and/or requested action. For example, a
user authenticates via a notebook computer to a remote server to which the user desires
access and requests some action of the server via that communication path. Subsequently,
the server contacts the user via the user’s cell phone to verify that the requested action
originated from the user. The user may confirm the intended action to an individual on the
telephone or provide an authentication code via the telephone. Out-of-band authentication
can be used to mitigate actual or suspected “man-in the-middle” attacks. The conditions or
criteria for activation include suspicious activities, new threat indicators, elevated threat
levels, or the impact or classification level of information in requested transactions.
IDENTIFIER MANAGEMENT
Control: Manage system identifiers by:
a. Receiving authorization from [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles] to assign
an individual, group, role, service, or device identifier;
b. Selecting an identifier that identifies an individual, group, role, service, or device;
c. Assigning the identifier to the intended individual, group, role, service, or device; and
d. Preventing reuse of identifiers for [Assignment: organization-defined time period].
Discussion: Common device identifiers include Media Access Control (MAC) addresses, Internet
Protocol (IP) addresses, or device-unique token identifiers. The management of individual
identifiers is not applicable to shared system accounts. Typically, individual identifiers are the
usernames of the system accounts assigned to those individuals. In such instances, the account
management activities of AC-2 use account names provided by IA-4. Identifier management also
addresses individual identifiers not necessarily associated with system accounts. Preventing the
reuse of identifiers implies preventing the assignment of previously used individual, group, role,
service, or device identifiers to different individuals, groups, roles, services, or devices.
IDENTIFIER MANAGEMENT | PROHIBIT ACCOUNT IDENTIFIERS AS PUBLIC IDENTIFIERS
Prohibit the use of system account identifiers that are the same as public identifiers for
individual accounts.
Discussion: Prohibiting account identifiers as public identifiers applies to any publicly
disclosed account identifier used for communication such as, electronic mail and instant
messaging. Prohibiting the use of systems account identifiers that are the same as some
public identifier, such as the individual identifier section of an electronic mail address, makes
it more difficult for adversaries to guess user identifiers. Prohibiting account identifiers as
public identifiers without the implementation of other supporting controls only complicates
guessing of identifiers. Additional protections are required for authenticators and credentials
to protect the account.
IDENTIFIER MANAGEMENT | IDENTIFY USER STATUS
Manage individual identifiers by uniquely identifying each individual as [Assignment:
organization-defined characteristic identifying individual status].
Discussion: Characteristics that identify the status of individuals include contractors, foreign
nationals, and non-organizational users. Identifying the status of individuals by these
characteristics provides additional information about the people with whom organizational
personnel are communicating. For example, it might be useful for a government employee
to know that one of the individuals on an email message is a contractor.
IDENTIFIER MANAGEMENT | DYNAMIC MANAGEMENT
Manage individual identifiers dynamically in accordance with [Assignment: organizationdefined dynamic identifier policy].
Discussion: In contrast to conventional approaches to identification that presume static
accounts for preregistered users, many distributed systems establish identifiers at runtime
for entities that were previously unknown. When identifiers are established at runtime for
previously unknown entities, organizations can anticipate and provision for the dynamic
establishment of identifiers. Pre-established trust relationships and mechanisms with
appropriate authorities to validate credentials and related identifiers are essential.
IDENTIFIER MANAGEMENT | CROSS-ORGANIZATION MANAGEMENT
Coordinate with the following external organizations for cross-organization management
of identifiers: [Assignment: organization-defined external organizations].
Discussion: Cross-organization identifier management provides the capability to identify
individuals, groups, roles, or devices when conducting cross-organization activities involving
the processing, storage, or transmission of information.
IDENTIFIER MANAGEMENT | PAIRWISE PSEUDONYMOUS IDENTIFIERS
Generate pairwise pseudonymous identifiers.
Discussion: A pairwise pseudonymous identifier is an opaque unguessable subscriber
identifier generated by an identity provider for use at a specific individual relying party.
Generating distinct pairwise pseudonymous identifiers with no identifying information about
a subscriber discourages subscriber activity tracking and profiling beyond the operational
requirements established by an organization. The pairwise pseudonymous identifiers are
unique to each relying party except in situations where relying parties can show a
demonstrable relationship justifying an operational need for correlation, or all parties
consent to being correlated in such a manner.
IDENTIFIER MANAGEMENT | ATTRIBUTE MAINTENANCE AND PROTECTION
Maintain the attributes for each uniquely identified individual, device, or service in
[Assignment: organization-defined protected central storage].
Discussion: For each of the entities covered in IA-2, IA-3, IA-8, and IA-9, it is important to
maintain the attributes for each authenticated entity on an ongoing basis in a central
(protected) store.
AUTHENTICATOR MANAGEMENT
Control: Manage system authenticators by:
a. Verifying, as part of the initial authenticator distribution, the identity of the individual,
group, role, service, or device receiving the authenticator;
b. Establishing initial authenticator content for any authenticators issued by the organization;
c. Ensuring that authenticators have sufficient strength of mechanism for their intended use;
d. Establishing and implementing administrative procedures for initial authenticator
distribution, for lost or compromised or damaged authenticators, and for revoking
authenticators;
e. Changing default authenticators prior to first use;
f. Changing or refreshing authenticators [Assignment: organization-defined time period by
authenticator type] or when [Assignment: organization-defined events] occur;
g. Protecting authenticator content from unauthorized disclosure and modification;
h. Requiring individuals to take, and having devices implement, specific controls to protect
authenticators; and
i. Changing authenticators for group or role accounts when membership to those accounts
changes.
Discussion: Authenticators include passwords, cryptographic devices, biometrics, certificates,
one-time password devices, and ID badges. Device authenticators include certificates and
passwords. Initial authenticator content is the actual content of the authenticator (e.g., the initial
password). In contrast, the requirements for authenticator content contain specific criteria or
characteristics (e.g., minimum password length). Developers may deliver system components
with factory default authentication credentials (i.e., passwords) to allow for initial installation
and configuration. Default authentication credentials are often well known, easily discoverable,
and present a significant risk. The requirement to protect individual authenticators may be
implemented via control PL-4 or PS-6 for authenticators in the possession of individuals and by
controls AC-3, AC-6, and SC-28 for authenticators stored in organizational systems, including
passwords stored in hashed or encrypted formats or files containing encrypted or hashed
passwords accessible with administrator privileges.
Systems support authenticator management by organization-defined settings and restrictions for
various authenticator characteristics (e.g., minimum password length, validation time window for
time synchronous one-time tokens, and number of allowed rejections during the verification
stage of biometric authentication). Actions can be taken to safeguard individual authenticators,
including maintaining possession of authenticators, not sharing authenticators with others, and
immediately reporting lost, stolen, or compromised authenticators. Authenticator management
includes issuing and revoking authenticators for temporary access when no longer needed
AUTHENTICATOR MANAGEMENT | PASSWORD-BASED AUTHENTICATION
For password-based authentication:
(a) Maintain a list of commonly-used, expected, or compromised passwords and update
the list [Assignment: organization-defined frequency] and when organizational
passwords are suspected to have been compromised directly or indirectly;
(b) Verify, when users create or update passwords, that the passwords are not found on
the list of commonly-used, expected, or compromised passwords in IA-5(1)(a);
(c) Transmit passwords only over cryptographically-protected channels;
(d) Store passwords using an approved salted key derivation function, preferably using a
keyed hash;
(e) Require immediate selection of a new password upon account recovery;
(f) Allow user selection of long passwords and passphrases, including spaces and all
printable characters;
(g) Employ automated tools to assist the user in selecting strong password
authenticators; and
(h) Enforce the following composition and complexity rules: [Assignment: organizationdefined composition and complexity rules].
Discussion: Password-based authentication applies to passwords regardless of whether they
are used in single-factor or multi-factor authentication. Long passwords or passphrases are
preferable over shorter passwords. Enforced composition rules provide marginal security
benefits while decreasing usability. However, organizations may choose to establish certain
rules for password generation (e.g., minimum character length for long passwords) under
certain circumstances and can enforce this requirement in IA-5(1)(h). Account recovery can
occur, for example, in situations when a password is forgotten. Cryptographically protected
passwords include salted one-way cryptographic hashes of passwords. The list of commonly
used, compromised, or expected passwords includes passwords obtained from previous
breach corpuses, dictionary words, and repetitive or sequential characters. The list includes
context-specific words, such as the name of the service, username, and derivatives thereof.
AUTHENTICATOR MANAGEMENT | PUBLIC KEY-BASED AUTHENTICATION
(a) For public key-based authentication:
(1) Enforce authorized access to the corresponding private key; and
(2) Map the authenticated identity to the account of the individual or group; and
(b) When public key infrastructure (PKI) is used:
(1) Validate certificates by constructing and verifying a certification path to an
accepted trust anchor, including checking certificate status information; and
(2) Implement a local cache of revocation data to support path discovery and
validation.
Discussion: Public key cryptography is a valid authentication mechanism for individuals,
machines, and devices. For PKI solutions, status information for certification paths includes
certificate revocation lists or certificate status protocol responses. For PIV cards, certificate
validation involves the construction and verification of a certification path to the Common
Policy Root trust anchor, which includes certificate policy processing. Implementing a local
cache of revocation data to support path discovery and validation also supports system
availability in situations where organizations are unable to access revocation information via
the network.
AUTHENTICATOR MANAGEMENT | CHANGE AUTHENTICATORS PRIOR TO DELIVERY
Require developers and installers of system components to provide unique authenticators
or change default authenticators prior to delivery and installation.
Discussion: Changing authenticators prior to the delivery and installation of system
components extends the requirement for organizations to change default authenticators
upon system installation by requiring developers and/or installers to provide unique
authenticators or change default authenticators for system components prior to delivery
and/or installation. However, it typically does not apply to developers of commercial off-theshelf information technology products. Requirements for unique authenticators can be
included in acquisition documents prepared by organizations when procuring systems or
system components.
AUTHENTICATOR MANAGEMENT | PROTECTION OF AUTHENTICATORS
Protect authenticators commensurate with the security category of the information to
which use of the authenticator permits access.
Discussion: For systems that contain multiple security categories of information without
reliable physical or logical separation between categories, authenticators used to grant
access to the systems are protected commensurate with the highest security category of
information on the systems. Security categories of information are determined as part of the
security categorization process.
AUTHENTICATOR MANAGEMENT | NO EMBEDDED UNENCRYPTED STATIC AUTHENTICATORS
Ensure that unencrypted static authenticators are not embedded in applications or other
forms of static storage.
Discussion: In addition to applications, other forms of static storage include access scripts
and function keys. Organizations exercise caution when determining whether embedded or
stored authenticators are in encrypted or unencrypted form. If authenticators are used in
the manner stored, then those representations are considered unencrypted authenticators.
AUTHENTICATOR MANAGEMENT | MULTIPLE SYSTEM ACCOUNTS
Implement [Assignment: organization-defined security controls] to manage the risk of
compromise due to individuals having accounts on multiple systems.
Discussion: When individuals have accounts on multiple systems and use the same
authenticators such as passwords, there is the risk that a compromise of one account may
lead to the compromise of other accounts. Alternative approaches include having different
authenticators (passwords) on all systems, employing a single sign-on or federation
mechanism, or using some form of one-time passwords on all systems. Organizations can
also use rules of behavior (see PL-4) and access agreements (see PS-6) to mitigate the risk of
multiple system accounts.
AUTHENTICATOR MANAGEMENT | FEDERATED CREDENTIAL MANAGEMENT
Use the following external organizations to federate credentials: [Assignment:
organization-defined external organizations].
Discussion: Federation provides organizations with the capability to authenticate individuals
and devices when conducting cross-organization activities involving the processing, storage,
or transmission of information. Using a specific list of approved external organizations for
authentication helps to ensure that those organizations are vetted and trusted.
AUTHENTICATOR MANAGEMENT | DYNAMIC CREDENTIAL BINDING
Bind identities and authenticators dynamically using the following rules: [Assignment:
organization-defined binding rules].
Discussion: Authentication requires some form of binding between an identity and the
authenticator that is used to confirm the identity. In conventional approaches, binding is
established by pre-provisioning both the identity and the authenticator to the system. For
example, the binding between a username (i.e., identity) and a password (i.e., authenticator)
is accomplished by provisioning the identity and authenticator as a pair in the system. New
authentication techniques allow the binding between the identity and the authenticator to
be implemented external to a system. For example, with smartcard credentials, the identity
and authenticator are bound together on the smartcard. Using these credentials, systems
can authenticate identities that have not been pre-provisioned, dynamically provisioning the
identity after authentication. In these situations, organizations can anticipate the dynamic
provisioning of identities. Pre-established trust relationships and mechanisms with
appropriate authorities to validate identities and related credentials are essential
AUTHENTICATOR MANAGEMENT | BIOMETRIC AUTHENTICATION PERFORMANCE
For biometric-based authentication, employ mechanisms that satisfy the following
biometric quality requirements [Assignment: organization-defined biometric quality
requirements].
Discussion: Unlike password-based authentication, which provides exact matches of userinput passwords to stored passwords, biometric authentication does not provide exact
matches. Depending on the type of biometric and the type of collection mechanism, there is
likely to be some divergence from the presented biometric and the stored biometric that
serves as the basis for comparison. Matching performance is the rate at which a biometric
algorithm correctly results in a match for a genuine user and rejects other users. Biometric
performance requirements include the match rate, which reflects the accuracy of the
biometric matching algorithm used by a system
AUTHENTICATOR MANAGEMENT | EXPIRATION OF CACHED AUTHENTICATORS
Prohibit the use of cached authenticators after [Assignment: organization-defined time
period].
Discussion: Cached authenticators are used to authenticate to the local machine when the
network is not available. If cached authentication information is out of date, the validity of
the authentication information may be questionable.
AUTHENTICATOR MANAGEMENT | MANAGING CONTENT OF PKI TRUST STORES
For PKI-based authentication, employ an organization-wide methodology for managing the
content of PKI trust stores installed across all platforms, including networks, operating
systems, browsers, and applications.
Discussion: An organization-wide methodology for managing the content of PKI trust stores
helps improve the accuracy and currency of PKI-based authentication credentials across the
organization
AUTHENTICATOR MANAGEMENT | GSA-APPROVED PRODUCTS AND SERVICES
Use only General Services Administration-approved products and services for identity,
credential, and access management.
Discussion: General Services Administration (GSA)-approved products and services are
products and services that have been approved through the GSA conformance program,
where applicable, and posted to the GSA Approved Products List. GSA provides guidance for
teams to design and build functional and secure systems that comply with Federal Identity,
Credential, and Access Management (FICAM) policies, technologies, and implementation
patterns
AUTHENTICATOR MANAGEMENT | IN-PERSON OR TRUSTED EXTERNAL PARTY AUTHENTICATOR
ISSUANCE
Require that the issuance of [Assignment: organization-defined types of and/or specific
authenticators] be conducted [Selection: in person; by a trusted external party] before
[Assignment: organization-defined registration authority] with authorization by
[Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles].
Discussion: Issuing authenticators in person or by a trusted external party enhances and
reinforces the trustworthiness of the identity proofing process
AUTHENTICATOR MANAGEMENT | PRESENTATION ATTACK DETECTION FOR BIOMETRIC
AUTHENTICATORS
Employ presentation attack detection mechanisms for biometric-based authentication.
Discussion: Biometric characteristics do not constitute secrets. Such characteristics can be
obtained by online web accesses, taking a picture of someone with a camera phone to
obtain facial images with or without their knowledge, lifting from objects that someone has
touched (e.g., a latent fingerprint), or capturing a high-resolution image (e.g., an iris
pattern). Presentation attack detection technologies including liveness detection, can
mitigate the risk of these types of attacks by making it difficult to produce artifacts intended
to defeat the biometric sensor.
AUTHENTICATOR MANAGEMENT | PASSWORD MANAGERS
(a) Employ [Assignment: organization-defined password managers] to generate and
manage passwords; and
(b) Protect the passwords using [Assignment: organization-defined controls].
Discussion: For systems where static passwords are employed, it is often a challenge to
ensure that the passwords are suitably complex and that the same passwords are not
employed on multiple systems. A password manager is a solution to this problem as it
automatically generates and stores strong and different passwords for various accounts. A
potential risk of using password managers is that adversaries can target the collection of
passwords generated by the password manager. Therefore, the collection of passwords
requires protection including encrypting the passwords (see IA-5(1)(d)) and storing the
collection offline in a token.
IDENTIFICATION AND AUTHENTICATION (NON-ORGANIZATIONAL USERS)
Control: Uniquely identify and authenticate non-organizational users or processes acting on
behalf of non-organizational users.
Discussion: Non-organizational users include system users other than organizational users
explicitly covered by IA-2. Non-organizational users are uniquely identified and authenticated for
accesses other than those explicitly identified and documented in AC-14. Identification and
authentication of non-organizational users accessing federal systems may be required to protect
federal, proprietary, or privacy-related information (with exceptions noted for national security
systems). Organizations consider many factors—including security, privacy, scalability, and
practicality—when balancing the need to ensure ease of use for access to federal information
and systems with the need to protect and adequately mitigate risk.
Control Enhancements:
(1) IDENTIFICATION AND AUTHENTICATION (NON-ORGANIZATIONAL USERS) | ACCEPTANCE OF PIV
CREDENTIALS FROM OTHER AGENCIES
Accept and electronically verify Personal Identity Verification-compliant credentials from
other federal agencies.
Discussion: Acceptance of Personal Identity Verification (PIV) credentials from other federal
agencies applies to both logical and physical access control systems. PIV credentials are
those credentials issued by federal agencies that conform to FIPS Publication 201 and
supporting guidelines. The adequacy and reliability of PIV card issuers are addressed and
authorized using [SP 800-79-2].
IDENTIFICATION AND AUTHENTICATION (NON-ORGANIZATIONAL USERS) | ACCEPTANCE OF EXTERNAL
AUTHENTICATORS
(a) Accept only external authenticators that are NIST-compliant; and
(b) Document and maintain a list of accepted external authenticators.
Discussion: Acceptance of only NIST-compliant external authenticators applies to
organizational systems that are accessible to the public (e.g., public-facing websites).
External authenticators are issued by nonfederal government entities and are compliant
with [SP 800-63B]. Approved external authenticators meet or exceed the minimum Federal
Government-wide technical, security, privacy, and organizational maturity requirements.
Meeting or exceeding Federal requirements allows Federal Government relying parties to
trust external authenticators in connection with an authentication transaction at a specified
authenticator assurance level.
IDENTIFICATION AND AUTHENTICATION (NON-ORGANIZATIONAL USERS) | USE OF DEFINED PROFILES
Conform to the following profiles for identity management [Assignment: organizationdefined identity management profiles].
Discussion: Organizations define profiles for identity management based on open identity
management standards. To ensure that open identity management standards are viable,
robust, reliable, sustainable, and interoperable as documented, the Federal Government
assesses and scopes the standards and technology implementations against applicable laws,
executive orders, directives, policies, regulations, standards, and guidelines.
IDENTIFICATION AND AUTHENTICATION (NON-ORGANIZATIONAL USERS) | ACCEPTANCE OF PIV-I
CREDENTIALS
Accept and verify federated or PKI credentials that meet [Assignment: organizationdefined policy].
Discussion: Acceptance of PIV-I credentials can be implemented by PIV, PIV-I, and other
commercial or external identity providers. The acceptance and verification of PIV-I-compliant
credentials apply to both logical and physical access control systems. The acceptance and
verification of PIV-I credentials address nonfederal issuers of identity cards that desire to
interoperate with United States Government PIV systems and that can be trusted by Federal
Government-relying parties. The X.509 certificate policy for the Federal Bridge Certification
Authority (FBCA) addresses PIV-I requirements. The PIV-I card is commensurate with the PIV
credentials as defined in cited references. PIV-I credentials are the credentials issued by a
PIV-I provider whose PIV-I certificate policy maps to the Federal Bridge PIV-I Certificate
Policy. A PIV-I provider is cross-certified with the FBCA (directly or through another PKI
bridge) with policies that have been mapped and approved as meeting the requirements of
the PIV-I policies defined in the FBCA certificate policy
IDENTIFICATION AND AUTHENTICATION (NON-ORGANIZATIONAL USERS) | DISASSOCIABILITY
Implement the following measures to disassociate user attributes or identifier assertion
relationships among individuals, credential service providers, and relying parties:
[Assignment: organization-defined measures].
Discussion: Federated identity solutions can create increased privacy risks due to the
tracking and profiling of individuals. Using identifier mapping tables or cryptographic
techniques to blind credential service providers and relying parties from each other or to
make identity attributes less visible to transmitting parties can reduce these privacy risks
PHYSICAL ACCESS AUTHORIZATIONS
Control:
a. Develop, approve, and maintain a list of individuals with authorized access to the facility
where the system resides;
b. Issue authorization credentials for facility access;
c. Review the access list detailing authorized facility access by individuals [Assignment:
organization-defined frequency]; and
d. Remove individuals from the facility access list when access is no longer required.
Discussion: Physical access authorizations apply to employees and visitors. Individuals with
permanent physical access authorization credentials are not considered visitors. Authorization
credentials include ID badges, identification cards, and smart cards. Organizations determine the
strength of authorization credentials needed consistent with applicable laws, executive orders,
directives, regulations, policies, standards, and guidelines. Physical access authorizations may not
be necessary to access certain areas within facilities that are designated as publicly accessible.
PHYSICAL ACCESS AUTHORIZATIONS | ACCESS BY POSITION OR ROLE
Authorize physical access to the facility where the system resides based on position or
role.
Discussion: Role-based facility access includes access by authorized permanent and
regular/routine maintenance personnel, duty officers, and emergency medical staff.
PHYSICAL ACCESS AUTHORIZATIONS | TWO FORMS OF IDENTIFICATION
Require two forms of identification from the following forms of identification for visitor
access to the facility where the system resides: [Assignment: organization-defined list of
acceptable forms of identification].
Discussion: Acceptable forms of identification include passports, REAL ID-compliant drivers’
licenses, and Personal Identity Verification (PIV) cards. For gaining access to facilities using
automated mechanisms, organizations may use PIV cards, key cards, PINs, and biometrics.
PHYSICAL ACCESS AUTHORIZATIONS | RESTRICT UNESCORTED ACCESS
Restrict unescorted access to the facility where the system resides to personnel with
[Selection (one or more): security clearances for all information contained within the
system; formal access authorizations for all information contained within the system; need
for access to all information contained within the system; [Assignment: organizationdefined physical access authorizations]].
Discussion: Individuals without required security clearances, access approvals, or need to
know are escorted by individuals with appropriate physical access authorizations to ensure
that information is not exposed or otherwise compromised.
PERSONNEL SCREENING
Control:
a. Screen individuals prior to authorizing access to the system; and
b. Rescreen individuals in accordance with [Assignment: organization-defined conditions
requiring rescreening and, where rescreening is so indicated, the frequency of rescreening].
Discussion: Personnel screening and rescreening activities reflect applicable laws, executive
orders, directives, regulations, policies, standards, guidelines, and specific criteria established for
the risk designations of assigned positions. Examples of personnel screening include background
investigations and agency checks. Organizations may define different rescreening conditions and
frequencies for personnel accessing systems based on types of information processed, stored, or
transmitted by the systems.
PERSONNEL SCREENING | CLASSIFIED INFORMATION
Verify that individuals accessing a system processing, storing, or transmitting classified
information are cleared and indoctrinated to the highest classification level of the
information to which they have access on the system.
Discussion: Classified information is the most sensitive information that the Federal
Government processes, stores, or transmits. It is imperative that individuals have the
requisite security clearances and system access authorizations prior to gaining access to such
information. Access authorizations are enforced by system access controls (see AC-3) and
flow controls (see AC-4).
PERSONNEL SCREENING | FORMAL INDOCTRINATION
Verify that individuals accessing a system processing, storing, or transmitting types of
classified information that require formal indoctrination, are formally indoctrinated for all
the relevant types of information to which they have access on the system.
Discussion: Types of classified information that require formal indoctrination include Special
Access Program (SAP), Restricted Data (RD), and Sensitive Compartmented Information (SCI).
PERSONNEL SCREENING | INFORMATION REQUIRING SPECIAL PROTECTIVE MEASURES
Verify that individuals accessing a system processing, storing, or transmitting information
requiring special protection:
(a) Have valid access authorizations that are demonstrated by assigned official
government duties; and
(b) Satisfy [Assignment: organization-defined additional personnel screening criteria].
Discussion: Organizational information that requires special protection includes controlled
unclassified information. Personnel security criteria include position sensitivity background
screening requirements.
PERSONNEL SCREENING | CITIZENSHIP REQUIREMENTS
Verify that individuals accessing a system processing, storing, or transmitting [Assignment:
organization-defined information types] meet [Assignment: organization-defined
citizenship requirements].
Discussion: None.