PR.AC-4: Access permissions and authorizations are managed, incorporating the principles of least privilege and separation of duties
POLICY AND PROCEDURES
Control:
a. Develop, document, and disseminate to [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or
roles]:
1. [Selection (one or more): Organization-level; Mission/business process-level; Systemlevel] access control policy that:
(a) Addresses purpose, scope, roles, responsibilities, management commitment,
coordination among organizational entities, and compliance; and
(b) Is consistent with applicable laws, executive orders, directives, regulations, policies,
standards, and guidelines; and
2. Procedures to facilitate the implementation of the access control policy and the
associated access controls;
b. Designate an [Assignment: organization-defined official] to manage the development,
documentation, and dissemination of the access control policy and procedures; and
c. Review and update the current access control:
1. Policy [Assignment: organization-defined frequency] and following [Assignment:
organization-defined events]; and
2. Procedures [Assignment: organization-defined frequency] and following [Assignment:
organization-defined events].
Discussion: Access control policy and procedures address the controls in the AC family that are
implemented within systems and organizations. The risk management strategy is an important
factor in establishing such policies and procedures. Policies and procedures contribute to security
and privacy assurance. Therefore, it is important that security and privacy programs collaborate
on the development of access control policy and procedures. Security and privacy program
policies and procedures at the organization level are preferable, in general, and may obviate the
need for mission- or system-specific policies and procedures. The policy can be included as part
of the general security and privacy policy or be represented by multiple policies reflecting the
complex nature of organizations. Procedures can be established for security and privacy
programs, for mission or business processes, and for systems, if needed. Procedures describe
how the policies or controls are implemented and can be directed at the individual or role that is
the object of the procedure. Procedures can be documented in system security and privacy plans
or in one or more separate documents. Events that may precipitate an update to access control
policy and procedures include assessment or audit findings, security incidents or breaches, or
changes in laws, executive orders, directives, regulations, policies, standards, and guidelines.
Simply restating controls does not constitute an organizational policy or procedure.
ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT
Control:
a. Define and document the types of accounts allowed and specifically prohibited for use
within the system;
b. Assign account managers;
c. Require [Assignment: organization-defined prerequisites and criteria] for group and role
membership;
d. Specify:
1. Authorized users of the system;
2. Group and role membership; and
3. Access authorizations (i.e., privileges) and [Assignment: organization-defined attributes
(as required)] for each account;
e. Require approvals by [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles] for requests to
create accounts;
f. Create, enable, modify, disable, and remove accounts in accordance with [Assignment:
organization-defined policy, procedures, prerequisites, and criteria];
g. Monitor the use of accounts;
h. Notify account managers and [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles] within:
1. [Assignment: organization-defined time period] when accounts are no longer required;
2. [Assignment: organization-defined time period] when users are terminated or
transferred; and
3. [Assignment: organization-defined time period] when system usage or need-to-know
changes for an individual;
i. Authorize access to the system based on:
1. A valid access authorization;
2. Intended system usage; and
3. [Assignment: organization-defined attributes (as required)];
j. Review accounts for compliance with account management requirements [Assignment:
organization-defined frequency];
k. Establish and implement a process for changing shared or group account authenticators (if
deployed) when individuals are removed from the group; and
l. Align account management processes with personnel termination and transfer processes.
Discussion: Examples of system account types include individual, shared, group, system, guest,
anonymous, emergency, developer, temporary, and service. Identification of authorized system
users and the specification of access privileges reflect the requirements in other controls in the
security plan. Users requiring administrative privileges on system accounts receive additional
scrutiny by organizational personnel responsible for approving such accounts and privileged
access, including system owner, mission or business owner, senior agency information security
officer, or senior agency official for privacy. Types of accounts that organizations may wish to
prohibit due to increased risk include shared, group, emergency, anonymous, temporary, and
guest accounts.
Where access involves personally identifiable information, security programs collaborate with
the senior agency official for privacy to establish the specific conditions for group and role
membership; specify authorized users, group and role membership, and access authorizations for
each account; and create, adjust, or remove system accounts in accordance with organizational
policies. Policies can include such information as account expiration dates or other factors that
trigger the disabling of accounts. Organizations may choose to define access privileges or other
attributes by account, type of account, or a combination of the two. Examples of other attributes
required for authorizing access include restrictions on time of day, day of week, and point of
origin. In defining other system account attributes, organizations consider system-related
requirements and mission/business requirements. Failure to consider these factors could affect
system availability.
Temporary and emergency accounts are intended for short-term use. Organizations establish
temporary accounts as part of normal account activation procedures when there is a need for
short-term accounts without the demand for immediacy in account activation. Organizations
establish emergency accounts in response to crisis situations and with the need for rapid account
activation. Therefore, emergency account activation may bypass normal account authorization
processes. Emergency and temporary accounts are not to be confused with infrequently used
accounts, including local logon accounts used for special tasks or when network resources are
unavailable (may also be known as accounts of last resort). Such accounts remain available and
are not subject to automatic disabling or removal dates. Conditions for disabling or deactivating
accounts include when shared/group, emergency, or temporary accounts are no longer required
and when individuals are transferred or terminated. Changing shared/group authenticators when
members leave the group is intended to ensure that former group members do not retain access
to the shared or group account. Some types of system accounts may require specialized training.
ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT | AUTOMATED SYSTEM ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT
Support the management of system accounts using [Assignment: organization-defined
automated mechanisms].
Discussion: Automated system account management includes using automated mechanisms
to create, enable, modify, disable, and remove accounts; notify account managers when an
account is created, enabled, modified, disabled, or removed, or when users are terminated
or transferred; monitor system account usage; and report atypical system account usage.
Automated mechanisms can include internal system functions and email, telephonic, and
text messaging notifications.
ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT | AUTOMATED TEMPORARY AND EMERGENCY ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT
Automatically [Selection: remove; disable] temporary and emergency accounts after
[Assignment: organization-defined time period for each type of account].
Discussion: Management of temporary and emergency accounts includes the removal or
disabling of such accounts automatically after a predefined time period rather than at the
convenience of the system administrator. Automatic removal or disabling of accounts
provides a more consistent implementation.
ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT | DISABLE ACCOUNTS
Disable accounts within [Assignment: organization-defined time period] when the
accounts: (a) Have expired;
          (b) Are no longer associated with a user or individual;
          (c) Are in violation of organizational policy; or
          (d) Have been inactive for [Assignment: organization-defined time period].
          Discussion: Disabling expired, inactive, or otherwise anomalous accounts supports the
          concepts of least privilege and least functionality which reduce the attack surface of the
          system
ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT | AUTOMATED AUDIT ACTIONS
Automatically audit account creation, modification, enabling, disabling, and removal
actions.
Discussion: Account management audit records are defined in accordance with AU-2 and
reviewed, analyzed, and reported in accordance with AU-6.
ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT | INACTIVITY LOGOUT
Require that users log out when [Assignment: organization-defined time period of
expected inactivity or description of when to log out].
Discussion: Inactivity logout is behavior- or policy-based and requires users to take physical
action to log out when they are expecting inactivity longer than the defined period.
Automatic enforcement of inactivity logout is addressed by AC-11.
ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT | DYNAMIC PRIVILEGE MANAGEMENT
Implement [Assignment: organization-defined dynamic privilege management
capabilities].
Discussion: In contrast to access control approaches that employ static accounts and
predefined user privileges, dynamic access control approaches rely on runtime access
control decisions facilitated by dynamic privilege management, such as attribute-based
access control. While user identities remain relatively constant over time, user privileges
typically change more frequently based on ongoing mission or business requirements and
the operational needs of organizations. An example of dynamic privilege management is the
immediate revocation of privileges from users as opposed to requiring that users terminate
and restart their sessions to reflect changes in privileges. Dynamic privilege management can
also include mechanisms that change user privileges based on dynamic rules as opposed to
editing specific user profiles. Examples include automatic adjustments of user privileges if
they are operating out of their normal work times, if their job function or assignment
changes, or if systems are under duress or in emergency situations. Dynamic privilege
management includes the effects of privilege changes, for example, when there are changes
to encryption keys used for communications.
ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT | PRIVILEGED USER ACCOUNTS
(a) Establish and administer privileged user accounts in accordance with [Selection: a rolebased access scheme; an attribute-based access scheme];
(b) Monitor privileged role or attribute assignments;
(c) Monitor changes to roles or attributes; and
(d) Revoke access when privileged role or attribute assignments are no longer
appropriate.
Discussion: Privileged roles are organization-defined roles assigned to individuals that allow
those individuals to perform certain security-relevant functions that ordinary users are not
authorized to perform. Privileged roles include key management, account management,
database administration, system and network administration, and web administration. A
role-based access scheme organizes permitted system access and privileges into roles. In
contrast, an attribute-based access scheme specifies allowed system access and privileges
based on attributes.
ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT | DYNAMIC ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT
Create, activate, manage, and deactivate [Assignment: organization-defined system
accounts] dynamically.
Discussion: Approaches for dynamically creating, activating, managing, and deactivating
system accounts rely on automatically provisioning the accounts at runtime for entities that
were previously unknown. Organizations plan for the dynamic management, creation,
activation, and deactivation of system accounts by establishing trust relationships, business
rules, and mechanisms with appropriate authorities to validate related authorizations and
privileges.
ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT | RESTRICTIONS ON USE OF SHARED AND GROUP ACCOUNTS
Only permit the use of shared and group accounts that meet [Assignment: organizationdefined conditions for establishing shared and group accounts].
Discussion: Before permitting the use of shared or group accounts, organizations consider
the increased risk due to the lack of accountability with such accounts
ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT | SHARED AND GROUP ACCOUNT CREDENTIAL CHANGE
ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT | USAGE CONDITIONS
Enforce [Assignment: organization-defined circumstances and/or usage conditions] for
[Assignment: organization-defined system accounts].
Discussion: Specifying and enforcing usage conditions helps to enforce the principle of least
privilege, increase user accountability, and enable effective account monitoring. Account
monitoring includes alerts generated if the account is used in violation of organizational
parameters. Organizations can describe specific conditions or circumstances under which
system accounts can be used, such as by restricting usage to certain days of the week, time
of day, or specific durations of time
ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT | ACCOUNT MONITORING FOR ATYPICAL USAGE
(a) Monitor system accounts for [Assignment: organization-defined atypical usage]; and
(b) Report atypical usage of system accounts to [Assignment: organization-defined
personnel or roles].
Discussion: Atypical usage includes accessing systems at certain times of the day or from
locations that are not consistent with the normal usage patterns of individuals. Monitoring
for atypical usage may reveal rogue behavior by individuals or an attack in progress. Account
monitoring may inadvertently create privacy risks since data collected to identify atypical
usage may reveal previously unknown information about the behavior of individuals.
Organizations assess and document privacy risks from monitoring accounts for atypical
usage in their privacy impact assessment and make determinations that are in alignment
with their privacy program plan.
ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT | DISABLE ACCOUNTS FOR HIGH-RISK INDIVIDUALS
Disable accounts of individuals within [Assignment: organization-defined time period] of
discovery of [Assignment: organization-defined significant risks].
Discussion: Users who pose a significant security and/or privacy risk include individuals for
whom reliable evidence indicates either the intention to use authorized access to systems to
cause harm or through whom adversaries will cause harm. Such harm includes adverse
impacts to organizational operations, organizational assets, individuals, other organizations,
or the Nation. Close coordination among system administrators, legal staff, human resource
managers, and authorizing officials is essential when disabling system accounts for high-risk
individuals
ACCESS ENFORCEMENT
Control: Enforce approved authorizations for logical access to information and system resources
in accordance with applicable access control policies.
Discussion: Access control policies control access between active entities or subjects (i.e., users
or processes acting on behalf of users) and passive entities or objects (i.e., devices, files, records,
domains) in organizational systems. In addition to enforcing authorized access at the system level
and recognizing that systems can host many applications and services in support of mission and
business functions, access enforcement mechanisms can also be employed at the application and
service level to provide increased information security and privacy. In contrast to logical access
controls that are implemented within the system, physical access controls are addressed by the
controls in the Physical and Environmental Protection (PE) family.
ACCESS ENFORCEMENT | DUAL AUTHORIZATION
Enforce dual authorization for [Assignment: organization-defined privileged commands
and/or other organization-defined actions].
Discussion: Dual authorization, also known as two-person control, reduces risk related to
insider threats. Dual authorization mechanisms require the approval of two authorized
individuals to execute. To reduce the risk of collusion, organizations consider rotating dual
authorization duties. Organizations consider the risk associated with implementing dual
authorization mechanisms when immediate responses are necessary to ensure public and
environmental safety
ACCESS ENFORCEMENT | MANDATORY ACCESS CONTROL
Enforce [Assignment: organization-defined mandatory access control policy] over the set
of covered subjects and objects specified in the policy, and where the policy:
(a) Is uniformly enforced across the covered subjects and objects within the system;
(b) Specifies that a subject that has been granted access to information is constrained
from doing any of the following;
(1) Passing the information to unauthorized subjects or objects;
(2) Granting its privileges to other subjects;
(3) Changing one or more security attributes (specified by the policy) on subjects,
objects, the system, or system components;
(4) Choosing the security attributes and attribute values (specified by the policy) to
be associated with newly created or modified objects; and
(5) Changing the rules governing access control; and
(c) Specifies that [Assignment: organization-defined subjects] may explicitly be granted
[Assignment: organization-defined privileges] such that they are not limited by any
defined subset (or all) of the above constraints.
Discussion: Mandatory access control is a type of nondiscretionary access control.
Mandatory access control policies constrain what actions subjects can take with information
obtained from objects for which they have already been granted access. This prevents the
subjects from passing the information to unauthorized subjects and objects. Mandatory
access control policies constrain actions that subjects can take with respect to the
propagation of access control privileges; that is, a subject with a privilege cannot pass that
privilege to other subjects. The policy is uniformly enforced over all subjects and objects to
which the system has control. Otherwise, the access control policy can be circumvented. This
enforcement is provided by an implementation that meets the reference monitor concept as
described in AC-25. The policy is bounded by the system (i.e., once the information is passed
outside of the control of the system, additional means may be required to ensure that the
constraints on the information remain in effect).
The trusted subjects described above are granted privileges consistent with the concept of
least privilege (see AC-6). Trusted subjects are only given the minimum privileges necessary
for satisfying organizational mission/business needs relative to the above policy. The control
is most applicable when there is a mandate that establishes a policy regarding access to
controlled unclassified information or classified information and some users of the system
are not authorized access to all such information resident in the system. Mandatory access
control can operate in conjunction with discretionary access control as described in AC-3(4).
A subject constrained in its operation by mandatory access control policies can still operate
under the less rigorous constraints of AC-3(4), but mandatory access control policies take
precedence over the less rigorous constraints of AC-3(4). For example, while a mandatory
access control policy imposes a constraint that prevents a subject from passing information
to another subject operating at a different impact or classification level, AC-3(4) permits the
subject to pass the information to any other subject with the same impact or classification
level as the subject. Examples of mandatory access control policies include the Bell-LaPadula
policy to protect confidentiality of information and the Biba policy to protect the integrity of
information
ACCESS ENFORCEMENT | DISCRETIONARY ACCESS CONTROL
Enforce [Assignment: organization-defined discretionary access control policy] over the set
of covered subjects and objects specified in the policy, and where the policy specifies that
a subject that has been granted access to information can do one or more of the following:
(a) Pass the information to any other subjects or objects;
(b) Grant its privileges to other subjects;
(c) Change security attributes on subjects, objects, the system, or the system’s
components;
(d) Choose the security attributes to be associated with newly created or revised objects;
or
(e) Change the rules governing access control.
Discussion: When discretionary access control policies are implemented, subjects are not
constrained with regard to what actions they can take with information for which they have
already been granted access. Thus, subjects that have been granted access to information
are not prevented from passing the information to other subjects or objects (i.e., subjects
have the discretion to pass). Discretionary access control can operate in conjunction with
mandatory access control as described in AC-3(3) and AC-3(15). A subject that is constrained
in its operation by mandatory access control policies can still operate under the less rigorous
constraints of discretionary access control. Therefore, while AC-3(3) imposes constraints that
prevent a subject from passing information to another subject operating at a different
impact or classification level, AC-3(4) permits the subject to pass the information to any
subject at the same impact or classification level. The policy is bounded by the system. Once
the information is passed outside of system control, additional means may be required to
ensure that the constraints remain in effect. While traditional definitions of discretionary
access control require identity-based access control, that limitation is not required for this
particular use of discretionary access control.
ACCESS ENFORCEMENT | SECURITY-RELEVANT INFORMATION
Prevent access to [Assignment: organization-defined security-relevant information] except
during secure, non-operable system states.
Discussion: Security-relevant information is information within systems that can potentially
impact the operation of security functions or the provision of security services in a manner
that could result in failure to enforce system security and privacy policies or maintain the
separation of code and data. Security-relevant information includes access control lists,
filtering rules for routers or firewalls, configuration parameters for security services, and
cryptographic key management information. Secure, non-operable system states include the
times in which systems are not performing mission or business-related processing, such as
when the system is offline for maintenance, boot-up, troubleshooting, or shut down.
ACCESS ENFORCEMENT | ROLE-BASED ACCESS CONTROL
Enforce a role-based access control policy over defined subjects and objects and control
access based upon [Assignment: organization-defined roles and users authorized to
assume such roles].
Discussion: Role-based access control (RBAC) is an access control policy that enforces access
to objects and system functions based on the defined role (i.e., job function) of the subject.
Organizations can create specific roles based on job functions and the authorizations (i.e.,
privileges) to perform needed operations on the systems associated with the organizationdefined roles. When users are assigned to specific roles, they inherit the authorizations or
privileges defined for those roles. RBAC simplifies privilege administration for organizations
because privileges are not assigned directly to every user (which can be a large number of
individuals) but are instead acquired through role assignments. RBAC can also increase
privacy and security risk if individuals assigned to a role are given access to information
beyond what they need to support organizational missions or business functions. RBAC can
be implemented as a mandatory or discretionary form of access control. For organizations
implementing RBAC with mandatory access controls, the requirements in AC-3(3) define the
scope of the subjects and objects covered by the policy
ACCESS ENFORCEMENT | REVOCATION OF ACCESS AUTHORIZATIONS
Enforce the revocation of access authorizations resulting from changes to the security
attributes of subjects and objects based on [Assignment: organization-defined rules
governing the timing of revocations of access authorizations].
Discussion: Revocation of access rules may differ based on the types of access revoked. For
example, if a subject (i.e., user or process acting on behalf of a user) is removed from a
group, access may not be revoked until the next time the object is opened or the next time
the subject attempts to access the object. Revocation based on changes to security labels
may take effect immediately. Organizations provide alternative approaches on how to make
revocations immediate if systems cannot provide such capability and immediate revocation
is necessary.
ACCESS ENFORCEMENT | CONTROLLED RELEASE
Release information outside of the system only if:
(a) The receiving [Assignment: organization-defined system or system component]
provides [Assignment: organization-defined controls]; and
(b) [Assignment: organization-defined controls] are used to validate the appropriateness
of the information designated for release.
Discussion: Organizations can only directly protect information when it resides within the
system. Additional controls may be needed to ensure that organizational information is
adequately protected once it is transmitted outside of the system. In situations where the
system is unable to determine the adequacy of the protections provided by external entities,
as a mitigation measure, organizations procedurally determine whether the external systems
are providing adequate controls. The means used to determine the adequacy of controls
provided by external systems include conducting periodic assessments (inspections/tests),
establishing agreements between the organization and its counterpart organizations, or
some other process. The means used by external entities to protect the information received
need not be the same as those used by the organization, but the means employed are
sufficient to provide consistent adjudication of the security and privacy policy to protect the
information and individuals’ privacy.
Controlled release of information requires systems to implement technical or procedural
means to validate the information prior to releasing it to external systems. For example, if
the system passes information to a system controlled by another organization, technical
means are employed to validate that the security and privacy attributes associated with the
exported information are appropriate for the receiving system. Alternatively, if the system
passes information to a printer in organization-controlled space, procedural means can be
employed to ensure that only authorized individuals gain access to the printer.
ACCESS ENFORCEMENT | AUDITED OVERRIDE OF ACCESS CONTROL MECHANISMS
Employ an audited override of automated access control mechanisms under [Assignment:
organization-defined conditions] by [Assignment: organization-defined roles].
Discussion: In certain situations, such as when there is a threat to human life or an event
that threatens the organization’s ability to carry out critical missions or business functions,
an override capability for access control mechanisms may be needed. Override conditions
are defined by organizations and used only in those limited circumstances. Audit events are
defined in AU-2. Audit records are generated in AU-12.
ACCESS ENFORCEMENT | RESTRICT ACCESS TO SPECIFIC INFORMATION TYPES
Restrict access to data repositories containing [Assignment: organization-defined
information types].
Discussion: Restricting access to specific information is intended to provide flexibility
regarding access control of specific information types within a system. For example, rolebased access could be employed to allow access to only a specific type of personally
identifiable information within a database rather than allowing access to the database in its
entirety. Other examples include restricting access to cryptographic keys, authentication
information, and selected system information
ACCESS ENFORCEMENT | ASSERT AND ENFORCE APPLICATION ACCESS
(a) Require applications to assert, as part of the installation process, the access needed to
the following system applications and functions: [Assignment: organization-defined
system applications and functions];
(b) Provide an enforcement mechanism to prevent unauthorized access; and
(c) Approve access changes after initial installation of the application.
Discussion: Asserting and enforcing application access is intended to address applications
that need to access existing system applications and functions, including user contacts,
global positioning systems, cameras, keyboards, microphones, networks, phones, or other
files.
ACCESS ENFORCEMENT | ATTRIBUTE-BASED ACCESS CONTROL
Enforce attribute-based access control policy over defined subjects and objects and control
access based upon [Assignment: organization-defined attributes to assume access
permissions].
Discussion: Attribute-based access control is an access control policy that restricts system
access to authorized users based on specified organizational attributes (e.g., job function,
identity), action attributes (e.g., read, write, delete), environmental attributes (e.g., time of
day, location), and resource attributes (e.g., classification of a document). Organizations can
create rules based on attributes and the authorizations (i.e., privileges) to perform needed
operations on the systems associated with organization-defined attributes and rules. When
users are assigned to attributes defined in attribute-based access control policies or rules,
they can be provisioned to a system with the appropriate privileges or dynamically granted
access to a protected resource. Attribute-based access control can be implemented as either
a mandatory or discretionary form of access control. When implemented with mandatory
access controls, the requirements in AC-3(3) define the scope of the subjects and objects
covered by the policy.
ACCESS ENFORCEMENT | INDIVIDUAL ACCESS
Provide [Assignment: organization-defined mechanisms] to enable individuals to have
access to the following elements of their personally identifiable information: [Assignment:
organization-defined elements].
Discussion: Individual access affords individuals the ability to review personally identifiable
information about them held within organizational records, regardless of format. Access
helps individuals to develop an understanding about how their personally identifiable
information is being processed. It can also help individuals ensure that their data is accurate.
Access mechanisms can include request forms and application interfaces. For federal
agencies, [PRIVACT] processes can be located in systems of record notices and on agency
websites. Access to certain types of records may not be appropriate (e.g., for federal
agencies, law enforcement records within a system of records may be exempt from
disclosure under the [PRIVACT]) or may require certain levels of authentication assurance.
Organizational personnel consult with the senior agency official for privacy and legal counsel
to determine appropriate mechanisms and access rights or limitations.
ACCESS ENFORCEMENT | DISCRETIONARY AND MANDATORY ACCESS CONTROL
(a) Enforce [Assignment: organization-defined mandatory access control policy] over the
set of covered subjects and objects specified in the policy; and
(b) Enforce [Assignment: organization-defined discretionary access control policy] over
the set of covered subjects and objects specified in the policy.
Discussion: Simultaneously implementing a mandatory access control policy and a
discretionary access control policy can provide additional protection against the
unauthorized execution of code by users or processes acting on behalf of users. This helps
prevent a single compromised user or process from compromising the entire system
SEPARATION OF DUTIES
Control:
a. Identify and document [Assignment: organization-defined duties of individuals requiring
separation]; and
b. Define system access authorizations to support separation of duties.
Discussion: Separation of duties addresses the potential for abuse of authorized privileges and
helps to reduce the risk of malevolent activity without collusion. Separation of duties includes
dividing mission or business functions and support functions among different individuals or roles,
conducting system support functions with different individuals, and ensuring that security
personnel who administer access control functions do not also administer audit functions.
Because separation of duty violations can span systems and application domains, organizations
consider the entirety of systems and system components when developing policy on separation
of duties. Separation of duties is enforced through the account management activities in AC-2,
access control mechanisms in AC-3, and identity management activities in IA-2, IA-4, and IA-12.
LEAST PRIVILEGE
Control: Employ the principle of least privilege, allowing only authorized accesses for users (or
processes acting on behalf of users) that are necessary to accomplish assigned organizational
tasks.
Discussion: Organizations employ least privilege for specific duties and systems. The principle of
least privilege is also applied to system processes, ensuring that the processes have access to
systems and operate at privilege levels no higher than necessary to accomplish organizational
missions or business functions. Organizations consider the creation of additional processes, roles,
and accounts as necessary to achieve least privilege. Organizations apply least privilege to the
development, implementation, and operation of organizational systems.
LEAST PRIVILEGE | AUTHORIZE ACCESS TO SECURITY FUNCTIONS
Authorize access for [Assignment: organization-defined individuals or roles] to:
(a) [Assignment: organization-defined security functions (deployed in hardware, software,
and firmware)]; and
(b) [Assignment: organization-defined security-relevant information].
Discussion: Security functions include establishing system accounts, configuring access
authorizations (i.e., permissions, privileges), configuring settings for events to be audited,
and establishing intrusion detection parameters. Security-relevant information includes
filtering rules for routers or firewalls, configuration parameters for security services,
cryptographic key management information, and access control lists. Authorized personnel
include security administrators, system administrators, system security officers, system
programmers, and other privileged users.
LEAST PRIVILEGE | NON-PRIVILEGED ACCESS FOR NONSECURITY FUNCTIONS
Require that users of system accounts (or roles) with access to [Assignment: organizationdefined security functions or security-relevant information] use non-privileged accounts or
roles, when accessing nonsecurity functions.
Discussion: Requiring the use of non-privileged accounts when accessing nonsecurity
functions limits exposure when operating from within privileged accounts or roles. The
inclusion of roles addresses situations where organizations implement access control
policies, such as role-based access control, and where a change of role provides the same
degree of assurance in the change of access authorizations for the user and the processes
acting on behalf of the user as would be provided by a change between a privileged and nonprivileged account.
LEAST PRIVILEGE | NETWORK ACCESS TO PRIVILEGED COMMANDS
Authorize network access to [Assignment: organization-defined privileged commands]
only for [Assignment: organization-defined compelling operational needs] and document
the rationale for such access in the security plan for the system.
Discussion: Network access is any access across a network connection in lieu of local access
(i.e., user being physically present at the device).
LEAST PRIVILEGE | SEPARATE PROCESSING DOMAINS
Provide separate processing domains to enable finer-grained allocation of user privileges.
Discussion: Providing separate processing domains for finer-grained allocation of user
privileges includes using virtualization techniques to permit additional user privileges within
a virtual machine while restricting privileges to other virtual machines or to the underlying
physical machine, implementing separate physical domains, and employing hardware or
software domain separation mechanisms.
LEAST PRIVILEGE | PRIVILEGED ACCOUNTS
Restrict privileged accounts on the system to [Assignment: organization-defined personnel
or roles].
Discussion: Privileged accounts, including super user accounts, are typically described as
system administrator for various types of commercial off-the-shelf operating systems.
Restricting privileged accounts to specific personnel or roles prevents day-to-day users from
accessing privileged information or privileged functions. Organizations may differentiate in
the application of restricting privileged accounts between allowed privileges for local
accounts and for domain accounts provided that they retain the ability to control system
configurations for key parameters and as otherwise necessary to sufficiently mitigate risk.
LEAST PRIVILEGE | PRIVILEGED ACCESS BY NON-ORGANIZATIONAL USERS
Prohibit privileged access to the system by non-organizational users.
Discussion: An organizational user is an employee or an individual considered by the
organization to have the equivalent status of an employee. Organizational users include
contractors, guest researchers, or individuals detailed from other organizations. A nonorganizational user is a user who is not an organizational user. Policies and procedures for
granting equivalent status of employees to individuals include a need-to-know, citizenship,
and the relationship to the organization
LEAST PRIVILEGE | REVIEW OF USER PRIVILEGES
(a) Review [Assignment: organization-defined frequency] the privileges assigned to
[Assignment: organization-defined roles or classes of users] to validate the need for
such privileges; and
(b) Reassign or remove privileges, if necessary, to correctly reflect organizational mission
and business needs.
Discussion: The need for certain assigned user privileges may change over time to reflect
changes in organizational mission and business functions, environments of operation,
technologies, or threats. A periodic review of assigned user privileges is necessary to
determine if the rationale for assigning such privileges remains valid. If the need cannot be
revalidated, organizations take appropriate corrective actions
LEAST PRIVILEGE | PRIVILEGE LEVELS FOR CODE EXECUTION
Prevent the following software from executing at higher privilege levels than users
executing the software: [Assignment: organization-defined software].
Discussion: In certain situations, software applications or programs need to execute with
elevated privileges to perform required functions. However, depending on the software
functionality and configuration, if the privileges required for execution are at a higher level
than the privileges assigned to organizational users invoking such applications or programs,
those users may indirectly be provided with greater privileges than assigned
LEAST PRIVILEGE | LOG USE OF PRIVILEGED FUNCTIONS
Log the execution of privileged functions.
Discussion: The misuse of privileged functions, either intentionally or unintentionally by
authorized users or by unauthorized external entities that have compromised system
accounts, is a serious and ongoing concern and can have significant adverse impacts on
organizations. Logging and analyzing the use of privileged functions is one way to detect
such misuse and, in doing so, help mitigate the risk from insider threats and the advanced
persistent threat
LEAST PRIVILEGE | PROHIBIT NON-PRIVILEGED USERS FROM EXECUTING PRIVILEGED FUNCTIONS
Prevent non-privileged users from executing privileged functions.
Discussion: Privileged functions include disabling, circumventing, or altering implemented
security or privacy controls, establishing system accounts, performing system integrity
checks, and administering cryptographic key management activities. Non-privileged users
are individuals who do not possess appropriate authorizations. Privileged functions that
require protection from non-privileged users include circumventing intrusion detection and
prevention mechanisms or malicious code protection mechanisms. Preventing nonprivileged users from executing privileged functions is enforced by AC-3.
PERMITTED ACTIONS WITHOUT IDENTIFICATION OR AUTHENTICATION
Control:
a. Identify [Assignment: organization-defined user actions] that can be performed on the
system without identification or authentication consistent with organizational mission and
business functions; and
b. Document and provide supporting rationale in the security plan for the system, user actions
not requiring identification or authentication.
Discussion: Specific user actions may be permitted without identification or authentication if
organizations determine that identification and authentication are not required for the specified
user actions. Organizations may allow a limited number of user actions without identification or
authentication, including when individuals access public websites or other publicly accessible
federal systems, when individuals use mobile phones to receive calls, or when facsimiles are
received. Organizations identify actions that normally require identification or authentication but
may, under certain circumstances, allow identification or authentication mechanisms to be
bypassed. Such bypasses may occur, for example, via a software-readable physical switch that
commands bypass of the logon functionality and is protected from accidental or unmonitored
use. Permitting actions without identification or authentication does not apply to situations
where identification and authentication have already occurred and are not repeated but rather
to situations where identification and authentication have not yet occurred. Organizations may
decide that there are no user actions that can be performed on organizational systems without
identification and authentication, and therefore, the value for the assignment operation can be
“none.”
SECURITY AND PRIVACY ATTRIBUTES
Control:
a. Provide the means to associate [Assignment: organization-defined types of security and
privacy attributes] with [Assignment: organization-defined security and privacy attribute
values] for information in storage, in process, and/or in transmission;
b. Ensure that the attribute associations are made and retained with the information;
c. Establish the following permitted security and privacy attributes from the attributes defined
in AC-16a for [Assignment: organization-defined systems]: [Assignment: organization-defined
security and privacy attributes];
d. Determine the following permitted attribute values or ranges for each of the established
attributes: [Assignment: organization-defined attribute values or ranges for established
attributes];
e. Audit changes to attributes; and
f. Review [Assignment: organization-defined security and privacy attributes] for applicability
[Assignment: organization-defined frequency].
Discussion: Information is represented internally within systems using abstractions known as
data structures. Internal data structures can represent different types of entities, both active and
passive. Active entities, also known as subjects, are typically associated with individuals, devices,
or processes acting on behalf of individuals. Passive entities, also known as objects, are typically
associated with data structures, such as records, buffers, tables, files, inter-process pipes, and
communications ports. Security attributes, a form of metadata, are abstractions that represent
the basic properties or characteristics of active and passive entities with respect to safeguarding
information. Privacy attributes, which may be used independently or in conjunction with security
attributes, represent the basic properties or characteristics of active or passive entities with
respect to the management of personally identifiable information. Attributes can be either
explicitly or implicitly associated with the information contained in organizational systems or
system components.
Attributes may be associated with active entities (i.e., subjects) that have the potential to send or
receive information, cause information to flow among objects, or change the system state. These
attributes may also be associated with passive entities (i.e., objects) that contain or receive
information. The association of attributes to subjects and objects by a system is referred to as
binding and is inclusive of setting the attribute value and the attribute type. Attributes, when
bound to data or information, permit the enforcement of security and privacy policies for access
control and information flow control, including data retention limits, permitted uses of
personally identifiable information, and identification of personal information within data
objects. Such enforcement occurs through organizational processes or system functions or
mechanisms. The binding techniques implemented by systems affect the strength of attribute
binding to information. Binding strength and the assurance associated with binding techniques
play important parts in the trust that organizations have in the information flow enforcement
process. The binding techniques affect the number and degree of additional reviews required by
organizations. The content or assigned values of attributes can directly affect the ability of
individuals to access organizational information.
Organizations can define the types of attributes needed for systems to support missions or
business functions. There are many values that can be assigned to a security attribute. By
specifying the permitted attribute ranges and values, organizations ensure that attribute values
are meaningful and relevant. Labeling refers to the association of attributes with the subjects
and objects represented by the internal data structures within systems. This facilitates systembased enforcement of information security and privacy policies. Labels include classification of
information in accordance with legal and compliance requirements (e.g., top secret, secret,
confidential, controlled unclassified), information impact level; high value asset information,
access authorizations, nationality; data life cycle protection (i.e., encryption and data expiration),
personally identifiable information processing permissions, including individual consent to
personally identifiable information processing, and contractor affiliation. A related term to
labeling is marking. Marking refers to the association of attributes with objects in a humanreadable form and displayed on system media. Marking enables manual, procedural, or processbased enforcement of information security and privacy policies. Security and privacy labels may
have the same value as media markings (e.g., top secret, secret, confidential). See MP-3 (Media
Marking).
SECURITY AND PRIVACY ATTRIBUTES | DYNAMIC ATTRIBUTE ASSOCIATION
Dynamically associate security and privacy attributes with [Assignment: organizationdefined subjects and objects] in accordance with the following security and privacy policies
as information is created and combined: [Assignment: organization-defined security and
privacy policies].
Discussion: Dynamic association of attributes is appropriate whenever the security or
privacy characteristics of information change over time. Attributes may change due to
information aggregation issues (i.e., characteristics of individual data elements are different
from the combined elements), changes in individual access authorizations (i.e., privileges),
changes in the security category of information, or changes in security or privacy policies.
Attributes may also change situationally.
SECURITY AND PRIVACY ATTRIBUTES | ATTRIBUTE VALUE CHANGES BY AUTHORIZED INDIVIDUALS
Provide authorized individuals (or processes acting on behalf of individuals) the capability
to define or change the value of associated security and privacy attributes.
Discussion: The content or assigned values of attributes can directly affect the ability of
individuals to access organizational information. Therefore, it is important for systems to be
able to limit the ability to create or modify attributes to authorized individuals.
SECURITY AND PRIVACY ATTRIBUTES | MAINTENANCE OF ATTRIBUTE ASSOCIATIONS BY SYSTEM
Maintain the association and integrity of [Assignment: organization-defined security and
privacy attributes] to [Assignment: organization-defined subjects and objects].
Discussion: Maintaining the association and integrity of security and privacy attributes to
subjects and objects with sufficient assurance helps to ensure that the attribute associations
can be used as the basis of automated policy actions. The integrity of specific items, such as
security configuration files, may be maintained through the use of an integrity monitoring
mechanism that detects anomalies and changes that deviate from “known good” baselines.
Automated policy actions include retention date expirations, access control decisions,
information flow control decisions, and information disclosure decisions.
SECURITY AND PRIVACY ATTRIBUTES | ASSOCIATION OF ATTRIBUTES BY AUTHORIZED INDIVIDUALS
Provide the capability to associate [Assignment: organization-defined security and privacy
attributes] with [Assignment: organization-defined subjects and objects] by authorized
individuals (or processes acting on behalf of individuals).
Discussion: Systems, in general, provide the capability for privileged users to assign security
and privacy attributes to system-defined subjects (e.g., users) and objects (e.g., directories,
files, and ports). Some systems provide additional capability for general users to assign
security and privacy attributes to additional objects (e.g., files, emails). The association of
attributes by authorized individuals is described in the design documentation. The support
provided by systems can include prompting users to select security and privacy attributes to
be associated with information objects, employing automated mechanisms to categorize
information with attributes based on defined policies, or ensuring that the combination of
the security or privacy attributes selected is valid. Organizations consider the creation,
deletion, or modification of attributes when defining auditable events.
SECURITY AND PRIVACY ATTRIBUTES | ATTRIBUTE DISPLAYS ON OBJECTS TO BE OUTPUT
Display security and privacy attributes in human-readable form on each object that the
system transmits to output devices to identify [Assignment: organization-defined special
dissemination, handling, or distribution instructions] using [Assignment: organizationdefined human-readable, standard naming conventions].
Discussion: System outputs include printed pages, screens, or equivalent items. System
output devices include printers, notebook computers, video displays, smart phones, and
tablets. To mitigate the risk of unauthorized exposure of information (e.g., shoulder surfing),
the outputs display full attribute values when unmasked by the subscriber.
SECURITY AND PRIVACY ATTRIBUTES | MAINTENANCE OF ATTRIBUTE ASSOCIATION
Require personnel to associate and maintain the association of [Assignment: organizationdefined security and privacy attributes] with [Assignment: organization-defined subjects
and objects] in accordance with [Assignment: organization-defined security and privacy
policies].
Discussion: Maintaining attribute association requires individual users (as opposed to the
system) to maintain associations of defined security and privacy attributes with subjects and
objects
SECURITY AND PRIVACY ATTRIBUTES | CONSISTENT ATTRIBUTE INTERPRETATION
Provide a consistent interpretation of security and privacy attributes transmitted between
distributed system components.
Discussion: To enforce security and privacy policies across multiple system components in
distributed systems, organizations provide a consistent interpretation of security and privacy
attributes employed in access enforcement and flow enforcement decisions. Organizations
can establish agreements and processes to help ensure that distributed system components
implement attributes with consistent interpretations in automated access enforcement and
flow enforcement actions.
SECURITY AND PRIVACY ATTRIBUTES | ASSOCIATION TECHNIQUES AND TECHNOLOGIES
Implement [Assignment: organization-defined techniques and technologies] in associating
security and privacy attributes to information.
Discussion: The association of security and privacy attributes to information within systems
is important for conducting automated access enforcement and flow enforcement actions.
The association of such attributes to information (i.e., binding) can be accomplished with
technologies and techniques that provide different levels of assurance. For example, systems
can cryptographically bind attributes to information using digital signatures that support
cryptographic keys protected by hardware devices (sometimes known as hardware roots of
trust).
SECURITY AND PRIVACY ATTRIBUTES | ATTRIBUTE REASSIGNMENT — REGRADING MECHANISMS
Change security and privacy attributes associated with information only via regrading
mechanisms validated using [Assignment: organization-defined techniques or procedures].
Discussion: A regrading mechanism is a trusted process authorized to re-classify and re-label
data in accordance with a defined policy exception. Validated regrading mechanisms are
used by organizations to provide the requisite levels of assurance for attribute reassignment
activities. The validation is facilitated by ensuring that regrading mechanisms are single
purpose and of limited function. Since security and privacy attribute changes can directly
affect policy enforcement actions, implementing trustworthy regrading mechanisms is
necessary to help ensure that such mechanisms perform in a consistent and correct mode of
operation
SECURITY AND PRIVACY ATTRIBUTES | ATTRIBUTE CONFIGURATION BY AUTHORIZED INDIVIDUALS
Provide authorized individuals the capability to define or change the type and value of
security and privacy attributes available for association with subjects and objects.
Discussion: The content or assigned values of security and privacy attributes can directly
affect the ability of individuals to access organizational information. Thus, it is important for
systems to be able to limit the ability to create or modify the type and value of attributes
available for association with subjects and objects to authorized individuals only.
ACCESS CONTROL DECISIONS
Control: [Selection: Establish procedures; Implement mechanisms] to ensure [Assignment:
organization-defined access control decisions] are applied to each access request prior to access
enforcement.
Discussion: Access control decisions (also known as authorization decisions) occur when
authorization information is applied to specific accesses. In contrast, access enforcement occurs
when systems enforce access control decisions. While it is common to have access control
decisions and access enforcement implemented by the same entity, it is not required, and it is
not always an optimal implementation choice. For some architectures and distributed systems,
different entities may make access control decisions and enforce access.
ACCESS CONTROL DECISIONS | TRANSMIT ACCESS AUTHORIZATION INFORMATION
Transmit [Assignment: organization-defined access authorization information] using
[Assignment: organization-defined controls] to [Assignment: organization-defined
systems] that enforce access control decisions.
Discussion: Authorization processes and access control decisions may occur in separate
parts of systems or in separate systems. In such instances, authorization information is
transmitted securely (e.g., using cryptographic mechanisms) so that timely access control
decisions can be enforced at the appropriate locations. To support the access control
decisions, it may be necessary to transmit as part of the access authorization information
supporting security and privacy attributes. This is because in distributed systems, there are
various access control decisions that need to be made, and different entities make these
decisions in a serial fashion, each requiring those attributes to make the decisions.
Protecting access authorization information ensures that such information cannot be
altered, spoofed, or compromised during transmission.
ACCESS CONTROL DECISIONS | NO USER OR PROCESS IDENTITY
Enforce access control decisions based on [Assignment: organization-defined security or
privacy attributes] that do not include the identity of the user or process acting on behalf
of the user.
Discussion: In certain situations, it is important that access control decisions can be made
without information regarding the identity of the users issuing the requests. These are
generally instances where preserving individual privacy is of paramount importance. In other
situations, user identification information is simply not needed for access control decisions,
and especially in the case of distributed systems, transmitting such information with the
needed degree of assurance may be very expensive or difficult to accomplish. MAC, RBAC,
ABAC, and label-based control policies, for example, might not include user identity as an
attribute.