RS.CO-2: Incidents are reported consistent with established criteria
AUDIT RECORD REVIEW, ANALYSIS, AND REPORTING
Control:
a. Review and analyze system audit records [Assignment: organization-defined frequency] for
indications of [Assignment: organization-defined inappropriate or unusual activity] and the
potential impact of the inappropriate or unusual activity;
b. Report findings to [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles]; and
c. Adjust the level of audit record review, analysis, and reporting within the system when there
is a change in risk based on law enforcement information, intelligence information, or other
credible sources of information.
Discussion: Audit record review, analysis, and reporting covers information security- and privacyrelated logging performed by organizations, including logging that results from the monitoring of
account usage, remote access, wireless connectivity, mobile device connection, configuration
settings, system component inventory, use of maintenance tools and non-local maintenance,
physical access, temperature and humidity, equipment delivery and removal, communications at
system interfaces, and use of mobile code or Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP). Findings can be
reported to organizational entities that include the incident response team, help desk, and
security or privacy offices. If organizations are prohibited from reviewing and analyzing audit
records or unable to conduct such activities, the review or analysis may be carried out by other
organizations granted such authority. The frequency, scope, and/or depth of the audit record
review, analysis, and reporting may be adjusted to meet organizational needs based on new
information received.
AUDIT RECORD REVIEW, ANALYSIS, AND REPORTING | AUTOMATED PROCESS INTEGRATION
Integrate audit record review, analysis, and reporting processes using [Assignment:
organization-defined automated mechanisms].
Discussion: Organizational processes that benefit from integrated audit record review,
analysis, and reporting include incident response, continuous monitoring, contingency
planning, investigation and response to suspicious activities, and Inspector General audits.
AUDIT RECORD REVIEW, ANALYSIS, AND REPORTING | CORRELATE AUDIT RECORD REPOSITORIES
Analyze and correlate audit records across different repositories to gain organization-wide
situational awareness.
Discussion: Organization-wide situational awareness includes awareness across all three
levels of risk management (i.e., organizational level, mission/business process level, and
information system level) and supports cross-organization awareness.
AUDIT RECORD REVIEW, ANALYSIS, AND REPORTING | CENTRAL REVIEW AND ANALYSIS
Provide and implement the capability to centrally review and analyze audit records from
multiple components within the system.
Discussion: Automated mechanisms for centralized reviews and analyses include Security
Information and Event Management products
AUDIT RECORD REVIEW, ANALYSIS, AND REPORTING | INTEGRATED ANALYSIS OF AUDIT RECORDS
Integrate analysis of audit records with analysis of [Selection (one or more): vulnerability
scanning information; performance data; system monitoring information; [Assignment:
organization-defined data/information collected from other sources]] to further enhance
the ability to identify inappropriate or unusual activity.
Discussion: Integrated analysis of audit records does not require vulnerability scanning, the
generation of performance data, or system monitoring. Rather, integrated analysis requires
that the analysis of information generated by scanning, monitoring, or other data collection
activities is integrated with the analysis of audit record information. Security Information
and Event Management tools can facilitate audit record aggregation or consolidation from
multiple system components as well as audit record correlation and analysis. The use of
standardized audit record analysis scripts developed by organizations (with localized script
adjustments, as necessary) provides more cost-effective approaches for analyzing audit
record information collected. The correlation of audit record information with vulnerability
scanning information is important in determining the veracity of vulnerability scans of the
system and in correlating attack detection events with scanning results. Correlation with
performance data can uncover denial-of-service attacks or other types of attacks that result
in the unauthorized use of resources. Correlation with system monitoring information can
assist in uncovering attacks and in better relating audit information to operational situations.
AUDIT RECORD REVIEW, ANALYSIS, AND REPORTING | CORRELATION WITH PHYSICAL MONITORING
Correlate information from audit records with information obtained from monitoring
physical access to further enhance the ability to identify suspicious, inappropriate,
unusual, or malevolent activity.
Discussion: The correlation of physical audit record information and the audit records from
systems may assist organizations in identifying suspicious behavior or supporting evidence of
such behavior. For example, the correlation of an individual’s identity for logical access to
certain systems with the additional physical security information that the individual was
present at the facility when the logical access occurred may be useful in investigations
AUDIT RECORD REVIEW, ANALYSIS, AND REPORTING | PERMITTED ACTIONS
Specify the permitted actions for each [Selection (one or more): system process; role; user]
associated with the review, analysis, and reporting of audit record information.
Discussion: Organizations specify permitted actions for system processes, roles, and users
associated with the review, analysis, and reporting of audit records through system account
management activities. Specifying permitted actions on audit record information is a way to
enforce the principle of least privilege. Permitted actions are enforced by the system and
include read, write, execute, append, and delete
AUDIT RECORD REVIEW, ANALYSIS, AND REPORTING | FULL TEXT ANALYSIS OF PRIVILEGED
COMMANDS
Perform a full text analysis of logged privileged commands in a physically distinct
component or subsystem of the system, or other system that is dedicated to that analysis.
Discussion: Full text analysis of privileged commands requires a distinct environment for the
analysis of audit record information related to privileged users without compromising such
information on the system where the users have elevated privileges, including the capability
to execute privileged commands. Full text analysis refers to analysis that considers the full
text of privileged commands (i.e., commands and parameters) as opposed to analysis that
considers only the name of the command. Full text analysis includes the use of pattern
matching and heuristics
AUDIT RECORD REVIEW, ANALYSIS, AND REPORTING | CORRELATION WITH INFORMATION FROM
NONTECHNICAL SOURCES
Correlate information from nontechnical sources with audit record information to enhance
organization-wide situational awareness.
Discussion: Nontechnical sources include records that document organizational policy
violations related to harassment incidents and the improper use of information assets. Such
information can lead to a directed analytical effort to detect potential malicious insider
activity. Organizations limit access to information that is available from nontechnical sources
due to its sensitive nature. Limited access minimizes the potential for inadvertent release of
privacy-related information to individuals who do not have a need to know. The correlation
of information from nontechnical sources with audit record information generally occurs
only when individuals are suspected of being involved in an incident. Organizations obtain
legal advice prior to initiating such actions.
INCIDENT REPORTING
Control:
a. Require personnel to report suspected incidents to the organizational incident response
capability within [Assignment: organization-defined time period]; and
b. Report incident information to [Assignment: organization-defined authorities].
Discussion: The types of incidents reported, the content and timeliness of the reports, and the
designated reporting authorities reflect applicable laws, executive orders, directives, regulations,
policies, standards, and guidelines. Incident information can inform risk assessments, control
effectiveness assessments, security requirements for acquisitions, and selection criteria for
technology products.
INCIDENT REPORTING | AUTOMATED REPORTING
Report incidents using [Assignment: organization-defined automated mechanisms].
Discussion: The recipients of incident reports are specified in IR-6b. Automated reporting
mechanisms include email, posting on websites (with automatic updates), and automated
incident response tools and programs.
INCIDENT REPORTING | VULNERABILITIES RELATED TO INCIDENTS
Report system vulnerabilities associated with reported incidents to [Assignment:
organization-defined personnel or roles].
Discussion: Reported incidents that uncover system vulnerabilities are analyzed by
organizational personnel including system owners, mission and business owners, senior
agency information security officers, senior agency officials for privacy, authorizing officials,
and the risk executive (function). The analysis can serve to prioritize and initiate mitigation
actions to address the discovered system vulnerability
INCIDENT REPORTING | SUPPLY CHAIN COORDINATION
Provide incident information to the provider of the product or service and other
organizations involved in the supply chain or supply chain governance for systems or
system components related to the incident.
Discussion: Organizations involved in supply chain activities include product developers,
system integrators, manufacturers, packagers, assemblers, distributors, vendors, and
resellers. Entities that provide supply chain governance include the Federal Acquisition
Security Council (FASC). Supply chain incidents include compromises or breaches that involve
information technology products, system components, development processes or personnel,
distribution processes, or warehousing facilities. Organizations determine the appropriate
information to share and consider the value gained from informing external organizations
about supply chain incidents, including the ability to improve processes or to identify the
root cause of an incident.
INCIDENT RESPONSE PLAN
Control:
a. Develop an incident response plan that:
1. Provides the organization with a roadmap for implementing its incident response
capability;
2. Describes the structure and organization of the incident response capability;
3. Provides a high-level approach for how the incident response capability fits into the
overall organization;
4. Meets the unique requirements of the organization, which relate to mission, size,
structure, and functions;
5. Defines reportable incidents;
6. Provides metrics for measuring the incident response capability within the organization;
7. Defines the resources and management support needed to effectively maintain and
mature an incident response capability;
8. Addresses the sharing of incident information;
9. Is reviewed and approved by [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles]
[Assignment: organization-defined frequency]; and
10. Explicitly designates responsibility for incident response to [Assignment: organizationdefined entities, personnel, or roles].
b. Distribute copies of the incident response plan to [Assignment: organization-defined incident
response personnel (identified by name and/or by role) and organizational elements];
c. Update the incident response plan to address system and organizational changes or
problems encountered during plan implementation, execution, or testing;
d. Communicate incident response plan changes to [Assignment: organization-defined incident
response personnel (identified by name and/or by role) and organizational elements]; and
e. Protect the incident response plan from unauthorized disclosure and modification.
Discussion: It is important that organizations develop and implement a coordinated approach to
incident response. Organizational mission and business functions determine the structure of
incident response capabilities. As part of the incident response capabilities, organizations
consider the coordination and sharing of information with external organizations, including
external service providers and other organizations involved in the supply chain. For incidents
involving personally identifiable information (i.e., breaches), include a process to determine
whether notice to oversight organizations or affected individuals is appropriate and provide that
notice accordingly.
INCIDENT RESPONSE PLAN | BREACHES
Include the following in the Incident Response Plan for breaches involving personally
identifiable information:
(a) A process to determine if notice to individuals or other organizations, including
oversight organizations, is needed;
(b) An assessment process to determine the extent of the harm, embarrassment,
inconvenience, or unfairness to affected individuals and any mechanisms to mitigate
such harms; and
(c) Identification of applicable privacy requirements.
Discussion: Organizations may be required by law, regulation, or policy to follow specific
procedures relating to breaches, including notice to individuals, affected organizations, and
oversight bodies; standards of harm; and mitigation or other specific requirements.