RS.CO-3: Information is shared consistent with response plans
CONTROL ASSESSMENTS
Control:
a. Select the appropriate assessor or assessment team for the type of assessment to be
conducted;
b. Develop a control assessment plan that describes the scope of the assessment including:
1. Controls and control enhancements under assessment;
2. Assessment procedures to be used to determine control effectiveness; and
3. Assessment environment, assessment team, and assessment roles and responsibilities;
c. Ensure the control assessment plan is reviewed and approved by the authorizing official or
designated representative prior to conducting the assessment;
d. Assess the controls in the system and its environment of operation [Assignment:
organization-defined frequency] to determine the extent to which the controls are
implemented correctly, operating as intended, and producing the desired outcome with
respect to meeting established security and privacy requirements;
e. Produce a control assessment report that document the results of the assessment; and
f. Provide the results of the control assessment to [Assignment: organization-defined
individuals or roles].
Discussion: Organizations ensure that control assessors possess the required skills and technical
expertise to develop effective assessment plans and to conduct assessments of system-specific,
hybrid, common, and program management controls, as appropriate. The required skills include
general knowledge of risk management concepts and approaches as well as comprehensive
knowledge of and experience with the hardware, software, and firmware system components
implemented.
Organizations assess controls in systems and the environments in which those systems operate
as part of initial and ongoing authorizations, continuous monitoring, FISMA annual assessments,
system design and development, systems security engineering, privacy engineering, and the
system development life cycle. Assessments help to ensure that organizations meet information
security and privacy requirements, identify weaknesses and deficiencies in the system design and
development process, provide essential information needed to make risk-based decisions as part
of authorization processes, and comply with vulnerability mitigation procedures. Organizations
conduct assessments on the implemented controls as documented in security and privacy plans.
Assessments can also be conducted throughout the system development life cycle as part of
systems engineering and systems security engineering processes. The design for controls can be
assessed as RFPs are developed, responses assessed, and design reviews conducted. If a design
to implement controls and subsequent implementation in accordance with the design are
assessed during development, the final control testing can be a simple confirmation utilizing
previously completed control assessment and aggregating the outcomes.
Organizations may develop a single, consolidated security and privacy assessment plan for the
system or maintain separate plans. A consolidated assessment plan clearly delineates the roles
and responsibilities for control assessment. If multiple organizations participate in assessing a
system, a coordinated approach can reduce redundancies and associated costs.
Organizations can use other types of assessment activities, such as vulnerability scanning and
system monitoring, to maintain the security and privacy posture of systems during the system
life cycle. Assessment reports document assessment results in sufficient detail, as deemed
necessary by organizations, to determine the accuracy and completeness of the reports and
whether the controls are implemented correctly, operating as intended, and producing the
desired outcome with respect to meeting requirements. Assessment results are provided to the
individuals or roles appropriate for the types of assessments being conducted. For example,
assessments conducted in support of authorization decisions are provided to authorizing
officials, senior agency officials for privacy, senior agency information security officers, and
authorizing official designated representatives.
To satisfy annual assessment requirements, organizations can use assessment results from the
following sources: initial or ongoing system authorizations, continuous monitoring, systems
engineering processes, or system development life cycle activities. Organizations ensure that
assessment results are current, relevant to the determination of control effectiveness, and
obtained with the appropriate level of assessor independence. Existing control assessment
results can be reused to the extent that the results are still valid and can also be supplemented
with additional assessments as needed. After the initial authorizations, organizations assess
controls during continuous monitoring. Organizations also establish the frequency for ongoing
assessments in accordance with organizational continuous monitoring strategies. External audits,
including audits by external entities such as regulatory agencies, are outside of the scope of CA-2.
CONTROL ASSESSMENTS | INDEPENDENT ASSESSORS
Employ independent assessors or assessment teams to conduct control assessments.
Discussion: Independent assessors or assessment teams are individuals or groups who
conduct impartial assessments of systems. Impartiality means that assessors are free from
any perceived or actual conflicts of interest regarding the development, operation,
sustainment, or management of the systems under assessment or the determination of
control effectiveness. To achieve impartiality, assessors do not create a mutual or conflicting
interest with the organizations where the assessments are being conducted, assess their
own work, act as management or employees of the organizations they are serving, or place
themselves in positions of advocacy for the organizations acquiring their services.
Independent assessments can be obtained from elements within organizations or be
contracted to public or private sector entities outside of organizations. Authorizing officials
determine the required level of independence based on the security categories of systems
and/or the risk to organizational operations, organizational assets, or individuals. Authorizing
officials also determine if the level of assessor independence provides sufficient assurance
that the results are sound and can be used to make credible, risk-based decisions. Assessor
independence determination includes whether contracted assessment services have
sufficient independence, such as when system owners are not directly involved in
contracting processes or cannot influence the impartiality of the assessors conducting the
assessments. During the system design and development phase, having independent
assessors is analogous to having independent SMEs involved in design reviews.
When organizations that own the systems are small or the structures of the organizations
require that assessments be conducted by individuals that are in the developmental,
operational, or management chain of the system owners, independence in assessment
processes can be achieved by ensuring that assessment results are carefully reviewed and
analyzed by independent teams of experts to validate the completeness, accuracy, integrity,
and reliability of the results. Assessments performed for purposes other than to support
authorization decisions are more likely to be useable for such decisions when performed by
assessors with sufficient independence, thereby reducing the need to repeat assessments.
CONTROL ASSESSMENTS | SPECIALIZED ASSESSMENTS
Include as part of control assessments, [Assignment: organization-defined frequency],
[Selection: announced; unannounced], [Selection (one or more): in-depth monitoring;
security instrumentation; automated security test cases; vulnerability scanning; malicious
user testing; insider threat assessment; performance and load testing; data leakage or
data loss assessment; [Assignment: organization-defined other forms of assessment]].
Discussion: Organizations can conduct specialized assessments, including verification and
validation, system monitoring, insider threat assessments, malicious user testing, and other
forms of testing. These assessments can improve readiness by exercising organizational
capabilities and indicating current levels of performance as a means of focusing actions to
improve security and privacy. Organizations conduct specialized assessments in accordance
with applicable laws, executive orders, directives, regulations, policies, standards, and
guidelines. Authorizing officials approve the assessment methods in coordination with the
organizational risk executive function. Organizations can include vulnerabilities uncovered
during assessments into vulnerability remediation processes. Specialized assessments can
also be conducted early in the system development life cycle (e.g., during initial design,
development, and unit testing)
CONTROL ASSESSMENTS | LEVERAGING RESULTS FROM EXTERNAL ORGANIZATIONS
Leverage the results of control assessments performed by [Assignment: organizationdefined external organization] on [Assignment: organization-defined system] when the
assessment meets [Assignment: organization-defined requirements].
Discussion: Organizations may rely on control assessments of organizational systems by
other (external) organizations. Using such assessments and reusing existing assessment
evidence can decrease the time and resources required for assessments by limiting the
independent assessment activities that organizations need to perform. The factors that
organizations consider in determining whether to accept assessment results from external
organizations can vary. Such factors include the organization’s past experience with the
organization that conducted the assessment, the reputation of the assessment organization,
the level of detail of supporting assessment evidence provided, and mandates imposed by
applicable laws, executive orders, directives, regulations, policies, standards, and guidelines.
Accredited testing laboratories that support the Common Criteria Program [ISO 15408-1],
the NIST Cryptographic Module Validation Program (CMVP), or the NIST Cryptographic
Algorithm Validation Program (CAVP) can provide independent assessment results that
organizations can leverage.
CONTINUOUS MONITORING
Control: Develop a system-level continuous monitoring strategy and implement continuous
monitoring in accordance with the organization-level continuous monitoring strategy that
includes:
a. Establishing the following system-level metrics to be monitored: [Assignment: organizationdefined system-level metrics];
b. Establishing [Assignment: organization-defined frequencies] for monitoring and
[Assignment: organization-defined frequencies] for assessment of control effectiveness;
c. Ongoing control assessments in accordance with the continuous monitoring strategy;
d. Ongoing monitoring of system and organization-defined metrics in accordance with the
continuous monitoring strategy;
e. Correlation and analysis of information generated by control assessments and monitoring;
f. Response actions to address results of the analysis of control assessment and monitoring
information; and
g. Reporting the security and privacy status of the system to [Assignment: organizationdefined personnel or roles] [Assignment: organization-defined frequency].
Discussion: Continuous monitoring at the system level facilitates ongoing awareness of the
system security and privacy posture to support organizational risk management decisions. The
terms “continuous” and “ongoing” imply that organizations assess and monitor their controls
and risks at a frequency sufficient to support risk-based decisions. Different types of controls may
require different monitoring frequencies. The results of continuous monitoring generate risk
response actions by organizations. When monitoring the effectiveness of multiple controls that
have been grouped into capabilities, a root-cause analysis may be needed to determine the
specific control that has failed. Continuous monitoring programs allow organizations to maintain
the authorizations of systems and common controls in highly dynamic environments of operation
with changing mission and business needs, threats, vulnerabilities, and technologies. Having
access to security and privacy information on a continuing basis through reports and dashboards
gives organizational officials the ability to make effective and timely risk management decisions,
including ongoing authorization decisions.
Automation supports more frequent updates to hardware, software, and firmware inventories,
authorization packages, and other system information. Effectiveness is further enhanced when
continuous monitoring outputs are formatted to provide information that is specific, measurable,
actionable, relevant, and timely. Continuous monitoring activities are scaled in accordance with
the security categories of systems. Monitoring requirements, including the need for specific
monitoring, may be referenced in other controls and control enhancements,
CONTINUOUS MONITORING | INDEPENDENT ASSESSMENT
Employ independent assessors or assessment teams to monitor the controls in the system
on an ongoing basis.
Discussion: Organizations maximize the value of control assessments by requiring that
assessments be conducted by assessors with appropriate levels of independence. The level
of required independence is based on organizational continuous monitoring strategies.
Assessor independence provides a degree of impartiality to the monitoring process. To
achieve such impartiality, assessors do not create a mutual or conflicting interest with the
organizations where the assessments are being conducted, assess their own work, act as
management or employees of the organizations they are serving, or place themselves in
advocacy positions for the organizations acquiring their services.
CONTINUOUS MONITORING | TREND ANALYSES
Employ trend analyses to determine if control implementations, the frequency of
continuous monitoring activities, and the types of activities used in the continuous
monitoring process need to be modified based on empirical data.
Discussion: Trend analyses include examining recent threat information that addresses the
types of threat events that have occurred in the organization or the Federal Government,
success rates of certain types of attacks, emerging vulnerabilities in technologies, evolving
social engineering techniques, the effectiveness of configuration settings, results from
multiple control assessments, and findings from Inspectors General or auditors
CONTINUOUS MONITORING | RISK MONITORING
Ensure risk monitoring is an integral part of the continuous monitoring strategy that
includes the following:
(a) Effectiveness monitoring;
(b) Compliance monitoring; and
(c) Change monitoring.
Discussion: Risk monitoring is informed by the established organizational risk tolerance.
Effectiveness monitoring determines the ongoing effectiveness of the implemented risk
response measures. Compliance monitoring verifies that required risk response measures
are implemented. It also verifies that security and privacy requirements are satisfied. Change
monitoring identifies changes to organizational systems and environments of operation that
may affect security and privacy risk.
CONTINUOUS MONITORING | CONSISTENCY ANALYSIS
Employ the following actions to validate that policies are established and implemented
controls are operating in a consistent manner: [Assignment: organization-defined actions].
Discussion: Security and privacy controls are often added incrementally to a system. As a
result, policies for selecting and implementing controls may be inconsistent, and the controls
could fail to work together in a consistent or coordinated manner. At a minimum, the lack of
consistency and coordination could mean that there are unacceptable security and privacy
gaps in the system. At worst, it could mean that some of the controls implemented in one
location or by one component are actually impeding the functionality of other controls (e.g.,
encrypting internal network traffic can impede monitoring). In other situations, failing to
consistently monitor all implemented network protocols (e.g., a dual stack of IPv4 and IPv6)
may create unintended vulnerabilities in the system that could be exploited by adversaries.
It is important to validate—through testing, monitoring, and analysis—that the implemented
controls are operating in a consistent, coordinated, non-interfering manner.
) CONTINUOUS MONITORING | AUTOMATION SUPPORT FOR MONITORING
Ensure the accuracy, currency, and availability of monitoring results for the system using
[Assignment: organization-defined automated mechanisms].
Discussion: Using automated tools for monitoring helps to maintain the accuracy, currency,
and availability of monitoring information which in turns helps to increase the level of
ongoing awareness of the system security and privacy posture in support of organizational
risk management decisions.
CONTINGENCY PLAN
Control:
a. Develop a contingency plan for the system that:
1. Identifies essential mission and business functions and associated contingency
requirements;
2. Provides recovery objectives, restoration priorities, and metrics;
3. Addresses contingency roles, responsibilities, assigned individuals with contact
information;
4. Addresses maintaining essential mission and business functions despite a system
disruption, compromise, or failure;
5. Addresses eventual, full system restoration without deterioration of the controls
originally planned and implemented;
6. Addresses the sharing of contingency information; and
7. Is reviewed and approved by [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles];
b. Distribute copies of the contingency plan to [Assignment: organization-defined key
contingency personnel (identified by name and/or by role) and organizational elements];
c. Coordinate contingency planning activities with incident handling activities;
d. Review the contingency plan for the system [Assignment: organization-defined frequency];
e. Update the contingency plan to address changes to the organization, system, or
environment of operation and problems encountered during contingency plan
implementation, execution, or testing;
f. Communicate contingency plan changes to [Assignment: organization-defined key
contingency personnel (identified by name and/or by role) and organizational elements];
g. Incorporate lessons learned from contingency plan testing, training, or actual contingency
activities into contingency testing and training; and
h. Protect the contingency plan from unauthorized disclosure and modification.
Discussion: Contingency planning for systems is part of an overall program for achieving
continuity of operations for organizational mission and business functions. Contingency planning
addresses system restoration and implementation of alternative mission or business processes
when systems are compromised or breached. Contingency planning is considered throughout the
system development life cycle and is a fundamental part of the system design. Systems can be
designed for redundancy, to provide backup capabilities, and for resilience. Contingency plans
reflect the degree of restoration required for organizational systems since not all systems need
to fully recover to achieve the level of continuity of operations desired. System recovery
objectives reflect applicable laws, executive orders, directives, regulations, policies, standards,
guidelines, organizational risk tolerance, and system impact level.
Actions addressed in contingency plans include orderly system degradation, system shutdown,
fallback to a manual mode, alternate information flows, and operating in modes reserved for
when systems are under attack. By coordinating contingency planning with incident handling
activities, organizations ensure that the necessary planning activities are in place and activated in
the event of an incident. Organizations consider whether continuity of operations during an
incident conflicts with the capability to automatically disable the system, as specified in IR-4(5).
Incident response planning is part of contingency planning for organizations and is addressed in
the IR (Incident Response) family.
CONTINGENCY PLAN | COORDINATE WITH RELATED PLANS
Coordinate contingency plan development with organizational elements responsible for
related plans.
Discussion: Plans that are related to contingency plans include Business Continuity Plans,
Disaster Recovery Plans, Critical Infrastructure Plans, Continuity of Operations Plans, Crisis
Communications Plans, Insider Threat Implementation Plans, Data Breach Response Plans,
Cyber Incident Response Plans, Breach Response Plans, and Occupant Emergency Plans.
CONTINGENCY PLAN | CAPACITY PLANNING
Conduct capacity planning so that necessary capacity for information processing,
telecommunications, and environmental support exists during contingency operations.
Discussion: Capacity planning is needed because different threats can result in a reduction
of the available processing, telecommunications, and support services intended to support
essential mission and business functions. Organizations anticipate degraded operations
during contingency operations and factor the degradation into capacity planning. For
capacity planning, environmental support refers to any environmental factor for which the
organization determines that it needs to provide support in a contingency situation, even if
in a degraded state. Such determinations are based on an organizational assessment of risk,
system categorization (impact level), and organizational risk tolerance.
CONTINGENCY PLAN | RESUME MISSION AND BUSINESS FUNCTIONS
Plan for the resumption of [Selection: all; essential] mission and business functions within
[Assignment: organization-defined time period] of contingency plan activation.
Discussion: Organizations may choose to conduct contingency planning activities to resume
mission and business functions as part of business continuity planning or as part of business
impact analyses. Organizations prioritize the resumption of mission and business functions.
The time period for resuming mission and business functions may be dependent on the
severity and extent of the disruptions to the system and its supporting infrastructure.
CONTINGENCY PLAN | CONTINUE MISSION AND BUSINESS FUNCTIONS
Plan for the continuance of [Selection: all; essential] mission and business functions with
minimal or no loss of operational continuity and sustains that continuity until full system
restoration at primary processing and/or storage sites.
Discussion: Organizations may choose to conduct the contingency planning activities to
continue mission and business functions as part of business continuity planning or business
impact analyses. Primary processing and/or storage sites defined by organizations as part of
contingency planning may change depending on the circumstances associated with the
contingency.
CONTINGENCY PLAN | ALTERNATE PROCESSING AND STORAGE SITES
Plan for the transfer of [Selection: all; essential] mission and business functions to
alternate processing and/or storage sites with minimal or no loss of operational continuity
and sustain that continuity through system restoration to primary processing and/or
storage sites.
Discussion: Organizations may choose to conduct contingency planning activities for
alternate processing and storage sites as part of business continuity planning or business
impact analyses. Primary processing and/or storage sites defined by organizations as part of
contingency planning may change depending on the circumstances associated with the
contingency.
CONTINGENCY PLAN | COORDINATE WITH EXTERNAL SERVICE PROVIDERS
Coordinate the contingency plan with the contingency plans of external service providers
to ensure that contingency requirements can be satisfied.
Discussion: When the capability of an organization to carry out its mission and business
functions is dependent on external service providers, developing a comprehensive and
timely contingency plan may become more challenging. When mission and business
functions are dependent on external service providers, organizations coordinate contingency
planning activities with the external entities to ensure that the individual plans reflect the
overall contingency needs of the organization.
CONTINGENCY PLAN | IDENTIFY CRITICAL ASSETS
Identify critical system assets supporting [Selection: all; essential] mission and business
functions.
Discussion: Organizations may choose to identify critical assets as part of criticality analysis,
business continuity planning, or business impact analyses. Organizations identify critical
system assets so that additional controls can be employed (beyond the controls routinely
implemented) to help ensure that organizational mission and business functions can
continue to be conducted during contingency operations. The identification of critical
information assets also facilitates the prioritization of organizational resources. Critical
system assets include technical and operational aspects. Technical aspects include system
components, information technology services, information technology products, and
mechanisms. Operational aspects include procedures (i.e., manually executed operations)
and personnel (i.e., individuals operating technical controls and/or executing manual
procedures). Organizational program protection plans can assist in identifying critical assets.
If critical assets are resident within or supported by external service providers, organizations
consider implementing CP-2(7) as a control enhancement.
INCIDENT HANDLING
Control:
a. Implement an incident handling capability for incidents that is consistent with the incident
response plan and includes preparation, detection and analysis, containment, eradication,
and recovery;
b. Coordinate incident handling activities with contingency planning activities;
c. Incorporate lessons learned from ongoing incident handling activities into incident response
procedures, training, and testing, and implement the resulting changes accordingly; and
d. Ensure the rigor, intensity, scope, and results of incident handling activities are comparable
and predictable across the organization.
Discussion: Organizations recognize that incident response capabilities are dependent on the
capabilities of organizational systems and the mission and business processes being supported by
those systems. Organizations consider incident response as part of the definition, design, and
development of mission and business processes and systems. Incident-related information can
be obtained from a variety of sources, including audit monitoring, physical access monitoring,
and network monitoring; user or administrator reports; and reported supply chain events. An
effective incident handling capability includes coordination among many organizational entities
(e.g., mission or business owners, system owners, authorizing officials, human resources offices,
physical security offices, personnel security offices, legal departments, risk executive [function],
operations personnel, procurement offices). Suspected security incidents include the receipt of
suspicious email communications that can contain malicious code. Suspected supply chain
incidents include the insertion of counterfeit hardware or malicious code into organizational
systems or system components. For federal agencies, an incident that involves personally
identifiable information is considered a breach. A breach results in unauthorized disclosure, the
loss of control, unauthorized acquisition, compromise, or a similar occurrence where a person
other than an authorized user accesses or potentially accesses personally identifiable
information or an authorized user accesses or potentially accesses such information for other
than authorized purposes.
) INCIDENT HANDLING | AUTOMATED INCIDENT HANDLING PROCESSES
Support the incident handling process using [Assignment: organization-defined automated
mechanisms].
Discussion: Automated mechanisms that support incident handling processes include online
incident management systems and tools that support the collection of live response data,
full network packet capture, and forensic analysis.
INCIDENT HANDLING | DYNAMIC RECONFIGURATION
Include the following types of dynamic reconfiguration for [Assignment: organizationdefined system components] as part of the incident response capability: [Assignment:
organization-defined types of dynamic reconfiguration].
Discussion: Dynamic reconfiguration includes changes to router rules, access control lists,
intrusion detection or prevention system parameters, and filter rules for guards or firewalls.
Organizations may perform dynamic reconfiguration of systems to stop attacks, misdirect
attackers, and isolate components of systems, thus limiting the extent of the damage from
breaches or compromises. Organizations include specific time frames for achieving the
reconfiguration of systems in the definition of the reconfiguration capability, considering the
potential need for rapid response to effectively address cyber threats.
INCIDENT HANDLING | CONTINUITY OF OPERATIONS
Identify [Assignment: organization-defined classes of incidents] and take the following
actions in response to those incidents to ensure continuation of organizational mission and
business functions: [Assignment: organization-defined actions to take in response to
classes of incidents].
Discussion: Classes of incidents include malfunctions due to design or implementation
errors and omissions, targeted malicious attacks, and untargeted malicious attacks. Incident
response actions include orderly system degradation, system shutdown, fall back to manual
mode or activation of alternative technology whereby the system operates differently,
employing deceptive measures, alternate information flows, or operating in a mode that is
reserved for when systems are under attack. Organizations consider whether continuity of
operations requirements during an incident conflict with the capability to automatically
disable the system as specified as part of IR-4(5).
INCIDENT HANDLING | INFORMATION CORRELATION
Correlate incident information and individual incident responses to achieve an
organization-wide perspective on incident awareness and response.
Discussion: Sometimes, a threat event, such as a hostile cyber-attack, can only be observed
by bringing together information from different sources, including various reports and
reporting procedures established by organizations.
INCIDENT HANDLING | AUTOMATIC DISABLING OF SYSTEM
Implement a configurable capability to automatically disable the system if [Assignment:
organization-defined security violations] are detected.
Discussion: Organizations consider whether the capability to automatically disable the
system conflicts with continuity of operations requirements specified as part of CP-2 or IR4(3). Security violations include cyber-attacks that have compromised the integrity of the
system or exfiltrated organizational information and serious errors in software programs
that could adversely impact organizational missions or functions or jeopardize the safety of
individuals.
INCIDENT HANDLING | INSIDER THREATS
Implement an incident handling capability for incidents involving insider threats.
Discussion: Explicit focus on handling incidents involving insider threats provides additional
emphasis on this type of threat and the need for specific incident handling capabilities to
provide appropriate and timely responses.
INCIDENT HANDLING | INSIDER THREATS — INTRA-ORGANIZATION COORDINATION
Coordinate an incident handling capability for insider threats that includes the following
organizational entities [Assignment: organization-defined entities].
Discussion: Incident handling for insider threat incidents (e.g., preparation, detection and
analysis, containment, eradication, and recovery) requires coordination among many
organizational entities, including mission or business owners, system owners, human
resources offices, procurement offices, personnel offices, physical security offices, senior
agency information security officer, operations personnel, risk executive (function), senior
agency official for privacy, and legal counsel. In addition, organizations may require external
support from federal, state, and local law enforcement agencies.
INCIDENT HANDLING | CORRELATION WITH EXTERNAL ORGANIZATIONS
Coordinate with [Assignment: organization-defined external organizations] to correlate
and share [Assignment: organization-defined incident information] to achieve a crossorganization perspective on incident awareness and more effective incident responses.
Discussion: The coordination of incident information with external organizations—including
mission or business partners, military or coalition partners, customers, and developers—can
provide significant benefits. Cross-organizational coordination can serve as an important risk
management capability. This capability allows organizations to leverage information from a
variety of sources to effectively respond to incidents and breaches that could potentially
affect the organization’s operations, assets, and individuals.
INCIDENT HANDLING | DYNAMIC RESPONSE CAPABILITY
Employ [Assignment: organization-defined dynamic response capabilities] to respond to
incidents.
Discussion: The dynamic response capability addresses the timely deployment of new or
replacement organizational capabilities in response to incidents. This includes capabilities
implemented at the mission and business process level and at the system level.
INCIDENT HANDLING | SUPPLY CHAIN COORDINATION
Coordinate incident handling activities involving supply chain events with other
organizations involved in the supply chain.
Discussion: Organizations involved in supply chain activities include product developers,
system integrators, manufacturers, packagers, assemblers, distributors, vendors, and
resellers. Supply chain incidents can occur anywhere through or to the supply chain and
include compromises or breaches that involve primary or sub-tier providers, information
technology products, system components, development processes or personnel, and
distribution processes or warehousing facilities. Organizations consider including processes
for protecting and sharing incident information in information exchange agreements and
their obligations for reporting incidents to government oversight bodies (e.g., Federal
Acquisition Security Council).
INCIDENT HANDLING | INTEGRATED INCIDENT RESPONSE TEAM
Establish and maintain an integrated incident response team that can be deployed to any
location identified by the organization in [Assignment: organization-defined time period].
Discussion: An integrated incident response team is a team of experts that assesses,
documents, and responds to incidents so that organizational systems and networks can
recover quickly and implement the necessary controls to avoid future incidents. Incident
response team personnel include forensic and malicious code analysts, tool developers,
systems security and privacy engineers, and real-time operations personnel. The incident
handling capability includes performing rapid forensic preservation of evidence and analysis
of and response to intrusions. For some organizations, the incident response team can be a
cross-organizational entity.
An integrated incident response team facilitates information sharing and allows
organizational personnel (e.g., developers, implementers, and operators) to leverage team
knowledge of the threat and implement defensive measures that enable organizations to
deter intrusions more effectively. Moreover, integrated teams promote the rapid detection
of intrusions, the development of appropriate mitigations, and the deployment of effective
defensive measures. For example, when an intrusion is detected, the integrated team can
rapidly develop an appropriate response for operators to implement, correlate the new
incident with information on past intrusions, and augment ongoing cyber intelligence
development. Integrated incident response teams are better able to identify adversary
tactics, techniques, and procedures that are linked to the operations tempo or specific
mission and business functions and to define responsive actions in a way that does not
disrupt those mission and business functions. Incident response teams can be distributed
within organizations to make the capability resilient.
INCIDENT HANDLING | MALICIOUS CODE AND FORENSIC ANALYSIS
Analyze malicious code and/or other residual artifacts remaining in the system after the
incident.
Discussion: When conducted carefully in an isolated environment, analysis of malicious code
and other residual artifacts of a security incident or breach can give the organization insight
into adversary tactics, techniques, and procedures. It can also indicate the identity or some
defining characteristics of the adversary. In addition, malicious code analysis can help the
organization develop responses to future incidents.
)INCIDENT HANDLING | BEHAVIOR ANALYSIS
Analyze anomalous or suspected adversarial behavior in or related to [Assignment:
organization-defined environments or resources].
Discussion: If the organization maintains a deception environment, an analysis of behaviors
in that environment, including resources targeted by the adversary and timing of the
incident or event, can provide insight into adversarial tactics, techniques, and procedures.
External to a deception environment, the analysis of anomalous adversarial behavior (e.g.,
changes in system performance or usage patterns) or suspected behavior (e.g., changes in
searches for the location of specific resources) can give the organization such insight.
)INCIDENT HANDLING | SECURITY OPERATIONS CENTER
Establish and maintain a security operations center.
Discussion: A security operations center (SOC) is the focal point for security operations and
computer network defense for an organization. The purpose of the SOC is to defend and
monitor an organization’s systems and networks (i.e., cyber infrastructure) on an ongoing
basis. The SOC is also responsible for detecting, analyzing, and responding to cybersecurity
incidents in a timely manner. The organization staffs the SOC with skilled technical and
operational personnel (e.g., security analysts, incident response personnel, systems security
engineers) and implements a combination of technical, management, and operational
controls (including monitoring, scanning, and forensics tools) to monitor, fuse, correlate,
analyze, and respond to threat and security-relevant event data from multiple sources.
These sources include perimeter defenses, network devices (e.g., routers, switches), and
endpoint agent data feeds. The SOC provides a holistic situational awareness capability to
help organizations determine the security posture of the system and organization. A SOC
capability can be obtained in a variety of ways. Larger organizations may implement a
dedicated SOC while smaller organizations may employ third-party organizations to provide
such a capability.
INCIDENT HANDLING | PUBLIC RELATIONS AND REPUTATION REPAIR
(a) Manage public relations associated with an incident; and
(b) Employ measures to repair the reputation of the organization.
Discussion: It is important for an organization to have a strategy in place for addressing
incidents that have been brought to the attention of the general public, have cast the
organization in a negative light, or have affected the organization’s constituents (e.g.,
partners, customers). Such publicity can be extremely harmful to the organization and affect
its ability to carry out its mission and business functions. Taking proactive steps to repair the
organization’s reputation is an essential aspect of reestablishing the trust and confidence of
its constituents.
INCIDENT RESPONSE PLAN
Control:
a. Develop an incident response plan that:
1. Provides the organization with a roadmap for implementing its incident response
capability;
2. Describes the structure and organization of the incident response capability;
3. Provides a high-level approach for how the incident response capability fits into the
overall organization;
4. Meets the unique requirements of the organization, which relate to mission, size,
structure, and functions;
5. Defines reportable incidents;
6. Provides metrics for measuring the incident response capability within the organization;
7. Defines the resources and management support needed to effectively maintain and
mature an incident response capability;
8. Addresses the sharing of incident information;
9. Is reviewed and approved by [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles]
[Assignment: organization-defined frequency]; and
10. Explicitly designates responsibility for incident response to [Assignment: organizationdefined entities, personnel, or roles].
b. Distribute copies of the incident response plan to [Assignment: organization-defined incident
response personnel (identified by name and/or by role) and organizational elements];
c. Update the incident response plan to address system and organizational changes or
problems encountered during plan implementation, execution, or testing;
d. Communicate incident response plan changes to [Assignment: organization-defined incident
response personnel (identified by name and/or by role) and organizational elements]; and
e. Protect the incident response plan from unauthorized disclosure and modification.
Discussion: It is important that organizations develop and implement a coordinated approach to
incident response. Organizational mission and business functions determine the structure of
incident response capabilities. As part of the incident response capabilities, organizations
consider the coordination and sharing of information with external organizations, including
external service providers and other organizations involved in the supply chain. For incidents
involving personally identifiable information (i.e., breaches), include a process to determine
whether notice to oversight organizations or affected individuals is appropriate and provide that
notice accordingly.
INCIDENT RESPONSE PLAN | BREACHES
Include the following in the Incident Response Plan for breaches involving personally
identifiable information:
(a) A process to determine if notice to individuals or other organizations, including
oversight organizations, is needed;
(b) An assessment process to determine the extent of the harm, embarrassment,
inconvenience, or unfairness to affected individuals and any mechanisms to mitigate
such harms; and
(c) Identification of applicable privacy requirements.
Discussion: Organizations may be required by law, regulation, or policy to follow specific
procedures relating to breaches, including notice to individuals, affected organizations, and
oversight bodies; standards of harm; and mitigation or other specific requirements.
MONITORING PHYSICAL ACCESS
Control:
a. Monitor physical access to the facility where the system resides to detect and respond to
physical security incidents;
b. Review physical access logs [Assignment: organization-defined frequency] and upon
occurrence of [Assignment: organization-defined events or potential indications of events];
and
c. Coordinate results of reviews and investigations with the organizational incident response
capability.
Discussion: Physical access monitoring includes publicly accessible areas within organizational
facilities. Examples of physical access monitoring include the employment of guards, video
surveillance equipment (i.e., cameras), and sensor devices. Reviewing physical access logs can
help identify suspicious activity, anomalous events, or potential threats. The reviews can be
supported by audit logging controls, such as AU-2, if the access logs are part of an automated
system. Organizational incident response capabilities include investigations of physical security
incidents and responses to the incidents. Incidents include security violations or suspicious
physical access activities. Suspicious physical access activities include accesses outside of normal
work hours, repeated accesses to areas not normally accessed, accesses for unusual lengths of
time, and out-of-sequence accesses.
MONITORING PHYSICAL ACCESS | INTRUSION ALARMS AND SURVEILLANCE EQUIPMENT
Monitor physical access to the facility where the system resides using physical intrusion
alarms and surveillance equipment.
Discussion: Physical intrusion alarms can be employed to alert security personnel when
unauthorized access to the facility is attempted. Alarm systems work in conjunction with
physical barriers, physical access control systems, and security guards by triggering a
response when these other forms of security have been compromised or breached. Physical
intrusion alarms can include different types of sensor devices, such as motion sensors,
contact sensors, and broken glass sensors. Surveillance equipment includes video cameras
installed at strategic locations throughout the facility.
MONITORING PHYSICAL ACCESS | AUTOMATED INTRUSION RECOGNITION AND RESPONSES
Recognize [Assignment: organization-defined classes or types of intrusions] and initiate
[Assignment: organization-defined response actions] using [Assignment: organizationdefined automated mechanisms].
Discussion: Response actions can include notifying selected organizational personnel or law
enforcement personnel. Automated mechanisms implemented to initiate response actions
include system alert notifications, email and text messages, and activating door locking
mechanisms. Physical access monitoring can be coordinated with intrusion detection
systems and system monitoring capabilities to provide integrated threat coverage for the
organization
MONITORING PHYSICAL ACCESS | VIDEO SURVEILLANCE
(a) Employ video surveillance of [Assignment: organization-defined operational areas];
(b) Review video recordings [Assignment: organization-defined frequency]; and
(c) Retain video recordings for [Assignment: organization-defined time period].
Discussion: Video surveillance focuses on recording activity in specified areas for the
purposes of subsequent review, if circumstances so warrant. Video recordings are typically
reviewed to detect anomalous events or incidents. Monitoring the surveillance video is not
required, although organizations may choose to do so. There may be legal considerations
when performing and retaining video surveillance, especially if such surveillance is in a public
location
MONITORING PHYSICAL ACCESS | MONITORING PHYSICAL ACCESS TO SYSTEMS
Monitor physical access to the system in addition to the physical access monitoring of the
facility at [Assignment: organization-defined physical spaces containing one or more
components of the system].
Discussion: Monitoring physical access to systems provides additional monitoring for those
areas within facilities where there is a concentration of system components, including server
rooms, media storage areas, and communications centers. Physical access monitoring can be
coordinated with intrusion detection systems and system monitoring capabilities to provide
comprehensive and integrated threat coverage for the organization.
VULNERABILITY MONITORING AND SCANNING
Control:
a. Monitor and scan for vulnerabilities in the system and hosted applications [Assignment:
organization-defined frequency and/or randomly in accordance with organization-defined
process] and when new vulnerabilities potentially affecting the system are identified and
reported;
b. Employ vulnerability monitoring tools and techniques that facilitate interoperability among
tools and automate parts of the vulnerability management process by using standards for:
1. Enumerating platforms, software flaws, and improper configurations;
2. Formatting checklists and test procedures; and
3. Measuring vulnerability impact;
c. Analyze vulnerability scan reports and results from vulnerability monitoring;
d. Remediate legitimate vulnerabilities [Assignment: organization-defined response times] in
accordance with an organizational assessment of risk;
e. Share information obtained from the vulnerability monitoring process and control
assessments with [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles] to help eliminate
similar vulnerabilities in other systems; and
f. Employ vulnerability monitoring tools that include the capability to readily update the
vulnerabilities to be scanned.
Discussion: Security categorization of information and systems guides the frequency and
comprehensiveness of vulnerability monitoring (including scans). Organizations determine the
required vulnerability monitoring for system components, ensuring that the potential sources of
vulnerabilities—such as infrastructure components (e.g., switches, routers, guards, sensors),
networked printers, scanners, and copiers—are not overlooked. The capability to readily update
vulnerability monitoring tools as new vulnerabilities are discovered and announced and as new
scanning methods are developed helps to ensure that new vulnerabilities are not missed by
employed vulnerability monitoring tools. The vulnerability monitoring tool update process helps
to ensure that potential vulnerabilities in the system are identified and addressed as quickly as
possible. Vulnerability monitoring and analyses for custom software may require additional
approaches, such as static analysis, dynamic analysis, binary analysis, or a hybrid of the three
approaches. Organizations can use these analysis approaches in source code reviews and in a
variety of tools, including web-based application scanners, static analysis tools, and binary
analyzers.
Vulnerability monitoring includes scanning for patch levels; scanning for functions, ports,
protocols, and services that should not be accessible to users or devices; and scanning for flow
control mechanisms that are improperly configured or operating incorrectly. Vulnerability
monitoring may also include continuous vulnerability monitoring tools that use instrumentation
to continuously analyze components. Instrumentation-based tools may improve accuracy and
may be run throughout an organization without scanning. Vulnerability monitoring tools that
facilitate interoperability include tools that are Security Content Automated Protocol (SCAP)-
validated. Thus, organizations consider using scanning tools that express vulnerabilities in the
Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures (CVE) naming convention and that employ the Open
Vulnerability Assessment Language (OVAL) to determine the presence of vulnerabilities. Sources
for vulnerability information include the Common Weakness Enumeration (CWE) listing and the
National Vulnerability Database (NVD). Control assessments, such as red team exercises, provide
additional sources of potential vulnerabilities for which to scan. Organizations also consider using
scanning tools that express vulnerability impact by the Common Vulnerability Scoring System
(CVSS).
Vulnerability monitoring includes a channel and process for receiving reports of security
vulnerabilities from the public at-large. Vulnerability disclosure programs can be as simple as
publishing a monitored email address or web form that can receive reports, including notification
authorizing good-faith research and disclosure of security vulnerabilities. Organizations generally
expect that such research is happening with or without their authorization and can use public
vulnerability disclosure channels to increase the likelihood that discovered vulnerabilities are
reported directly to the organization for remediation.
Organizations may also employ the use of financial incentives (also known as “bug bounties”) to
further encourage external security researchers to report discovered vulnerabilities. Bug bounty
programs can be tailored to the organization’s needs. Bounties can be operated indefinitely or
over a defined period of time and can be offered to the general public or to a curated group.
Organizations may run public and private bounties simultaneously and could choose to offer
partially credentialed access to certain participants in order to evaluate security vulnerabilities
from privileged vantage points
VULNERABILITY MONITORING AND SCANNING | UPDATE VULNERABILITIES TO BE SCANNED
Update the system vulnerabilities to be scanned [Selection (one or more): [Assignment:
organization-defined frequency]; prior to a new scan; when new vulnerabilities are
identified and reported].
Discussion: Due to the complexity of modern software, systems, and other factors, new
vulnerabilities are discovered on a regular basis. It is important that newly discovered
vulnerabilities are added to the list of vulnerabilities to be scanned to ensure that the
organization can take steps to mitigate those vulnerabilities in a timely manner.
VULNERABILITY MONITORING AND SCANNING | BREADTH AND DEPTH OF COVERAGE
Define the breadth and depth of vulnerability scanning coverage.
Discussion: The breadth of vulnerability scanning coverage can be expressed as a
percentage of components within the system, by the particular types of systems, by the
criticality of systems, or by the number of vulnerabilities to be checked. Conversely, the
depth of vulnerability scanning coverage can be expressed as the level of the system design
that the organization intends to monitor (e.g., component, module, subsystem, element).
Organizations can determine the sufficiency of vulnerability scanning coverage with regard
to its risk tolerance and other factors. Scanning tools and how the tools are configured may
affect the depth and coverage. Multiple scanning tools may be needed to achieve the
desired depth and coverage. [SP 800-53A] provides additional information on the breadth
and depth of coverage.
VULNERABILITY MONITORING AND SCANNING | DISCOVERABLE INFORMATION
Determine information about the system that is discoverable and take [Assignment:
organization-defined corrective actions].
Discussion: Discoverable information includes information that adversaries could obtain
without compromising or breaching the system, such as by collecting information that the
system is exposing or by conducting extensive web searches. Corrective actions include
notifying appropriate organizational personnel, removing designated information, or
changing the system to make the designated information less relevant or attractive to
adversaries. This enhancement excludes intentionally discoverable information that may be
part of a decoy capability (e.g., honeypots, honeynets, or deception nets) deployed by the
organization.
) VULNERABILITY MONITORING AND SCANNING | PRIVILEGED ACCESS
Implement privileged access authorization to [Assignment: organization-defined system
components] for [Assignment: organization-defined vulnerability scanning activities].
Discussion: In certain situations, the nature of the vulnerability scanning may be more
intrusive, or the system component that is the subject of the scanning may contain classified
or controlled unclassified information, such as personally identifiable information. Privileged
access authorization to selected system components facilitates more thorough vulnerability
scanning and protects the sensitive nature of such scanning.
VULNERABILITY MONITORING AND SCANNING | AUTOMATED TREND ANALYSES
Compare the results of multiple vulnerability scans using [Assignment: organizationdefined automated mechanisms].
Discussion: Using automated mechanisms to analyze multiple vulnerability scans over time
can help determine trends in system vulnerabilities and identify patterns of attack.
VULNERABILITY MONITORING AND SCANNING | REVIEW HISTORIC AUDIT LOGS
Review historic audit logs to determine if a vulnerability identified in a [Assignment:
organization-defined system] has been previously exploited within an [Assignment:
organization-defined time period].
Discussion: Reviewing historic audit logs to determine if a recently detected vulnerability in
a system has been previously exploited by an adversary can provide important information
for forensic analyses. Such analyses can help identify, for example, the extent of a previous
intrusion, the trade craft employed during the attack, organizational information exfiltrated
or modified, mission or business capabilities affected, and the duration of the attack.
VULNERABILITY MONITORING AND SCANNING | CORRELATE SCANNING INFORMATION
Correlate the output from vulnerability scanning tools to determine the presence of multivulnerability and multi-hop attack vectors.
Discussion: An attack vector is a path or means by which an adversary can gain access to a
system in order to deliver malicious code or exfiltrate information. Organizations can use
attack trees to show how hostile activities by adversaries interact and combine to produce
adverse impacts or negative consequences to systems and organizations. Such information,
together with correlated data from vulnerability scanning tools, can provide greater clarity
regarding multi-vulnerability and multi-hop attack vectors. The correlation of vulnerability
scanning information is especially important when organizations are transitioning from older
technologies to newer technologies (e.g., transitioning from IPv4 to IPv6 network protocols).
During such transitions, some system components may inadvertently be unmanaged and
create opportunities for adversary exploitation.
) VULNERABILITY MONITORING AND SCANNING | PUBLIC DISCLOSURE PROGRAM
Establish a public reporting channel for receiving reports of vulnerabilities in
organizational systems and system components.
Discussion: The reporting channel is publicly discoverable and contains clear language
authorizing good-faith research and the disclosure of vulnerabilities to the organization. The
organization does not condition its authorization on an expectation of indefinite nondisclosure to the public by the reporting entity but may request a specific time period to
properly remediate the vulnerability
SYSTEM MONITORING
Control:
a. Monitor the system to detect:
1. Attacks and indicators of potential attacks in accordance with the following monitoring
objectives: [Assignment: organization-defined monitoring objectives]; and
2. Unauthorized local, network, and remote connections;
b. Identify unauthorized use of the system through the following techniques and methods:
[Assignment: organization-defined techniques and methods];
c. Invoke internal monitoring capabilities or deploy monitoring devices:
1. Strategically within the system to collect organization-determined essential information;
and
2. At ad hoc locations within the system to track specific types of transactions of interest
to the organization;
d. Analyze detected events and anomalies;
e. Adjust the level of system monitoring activity when there is a change in risk to organizational
operations and assets, individuals, other organizations, or the Nation;
f. Obtain legal opinion regarding system monitoring activities; and
g. Provide [Assignment: organization-defined system monitoring information] to [Assignment:
organization-defined personnel or roles] [Selection (one or more): as needed; [Assignment:
organization-defined frequency]].
Discussion: System monitoring includes external and internal monitoring. External monitoring
includes the observation of events occurring at external interfaces to the system. Internal
monitoring includes the observation of events occurring within the system. Organizations
monitor systems by observing audit activities in real time or by observing other system aspects
such as access patterns, characteristics of access, and other actions. The monitoring objectives
guide and inform the determination of the events. System monitoring capabilities are achieved
through a variety of tools and techniques, including intrusion detection and prevention systems,
malicious code protection software, scanning tools, audit record monitoring software, and
network monitoring software.
Depending on the security architecture, the distribution and configuration of monitoring devices
may impact throughput at key internal and external boundaries as well as at other locations
across a network due to the introduction of network throughput latency. If throughput
management is needed, such devices are strategically located and deployed as part of an
established organization-wide security architecture. Strategic locations for monitoring devices
include selected perimeter locations and near key servers and server farms that support critical
applications. Monitoring devices are typically employed at the managed interfaces associated
with controls SC-7 and AC-17. The information collected is a function of the organizational
monitoring objectives and the capability of systems to support such objectives. Specific types of
transactions of interest include Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) traffic that bypasses HTTP
proxies. System monitoring is an integral part of organizational continuous monitoring and
incident response programs, and output from system monitoring serves as input to those
programs. System monitoring requirements, including the need for specific types of system
monitoring, may be referenced in other controls
Adjustments to levels of system monitoring are based on law enforcement information,
intelligence information, or other sources of information. The legality of system monitoring
activities is based on applicable laws, executive orders, directives, regulations, policies,
standards, and guidelines.
SYSTEM MONITORING | SYSTEM-WIDE INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM
Connect and configure individual intrusion detection tools into a system-wide intrusion
detection system.
Discussion: Linking individual intrusion detection tools into a system-wide intrusion
detection system provides additional coverage and effective detection capabilities. The
information contained in one intrusion detection tool can be shared widely across the
organization, making the system-wide detection capability more robust and powerful.
SYSTEM MONITORING | AUTOMATED TOOLS AND MECHANISMS FOR REAL-TIME ANALYSIS
Employ automated tools and mechanisms to support near real-time analysis of events.
Discussion: Automated tools and mechanisms include host-based, network-based,
transport-based, or storage-based event monitoring tools and mechanisms or security
information and event management (SIEM) technologies that provide real-time analysis of
alerts and notifications generated by organizational systems. Automated monitoring
techniques can create unintended privacy risks because automated controls may connect to
external or otherwise unrelated systems. The matching of records between these systems
may create linkages with unintended consequences. Organizations assess and document
these risks in their privacy impact assessment and make determinations that are in
alignment with their privacy program plan.
SYSTEM MONITORING | AUTOMATED TOOL AND MECHANISM INTEGRATION
Employ automated tools and mechanisms to integrate intrusion detection tools and
mechanisms into access control and flow control mechanisms.
Discussion: Using automated tools and mechanisms to integrate intrusion detection tools
and mechanisms into access and flow control mechanisms facilitates a rapid response to
attacks by enabling the reconfiguration of mechanisms in support of attack isolation and
elimination.
SYSTEM MONITORING | INBOUND AND OUTBOUND COMMUNICATIONS TRAFFIC
(a) Determine criteria for unusual or unauthorized activities or conditions for inbound
and outbound communications traffic;
(b) Monitor inbound and outbound communications traffic [Assignment: organizationdefined frequency] for [Assignment: organization-defined unusual or unauthorized
activities or conditions].
Discussion: Unusual or unauthorized activities or conditions related to system inbound and
outbound communications traffic includes internal traffic that indicates the presence of
malicious code or unauthorized use of legitimate code or credentials within organizational
systems or propagating among system components, signaling to external systems, and the
unauthorized exporting of information. Evidence of malicious code or unauthorized use of
legitimate code or credentials is used to identify potentially compromised systems or system
components.
SYSTEM MONITORING | SYSTEM-GENERATED ALERTS
Alert [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles] when the following systemgenerated indications of compromise or potential compromise occur: [Assignment:
organization-defined compromise indicators].
Discussion: Alerts may be generated from a variety of sources, including audit records or
inputs from malicious code protection mechanisms, intrusion detection or prevention
mechanisms, or boundary protection devices such as firewalls, gateways, and routers. Alerts
can be automated and may be transmitted telephonically, by electronic mail messages, or by
text messaging. Organizational personnel on the alert notification list can include system
administrators, mission or business owners, system owners, information owners/stewards,
senior agency information security officers, senior agency officials for privacy, system
security officers, or privacy officers. In contrast to alerts generated by the system, alerts
generated by organizations in SI-4(12) focus on information sources external to the system,
such as suspicious activity reports and reports on potential insider threats.
SYSTEM MONITORING | AUTOMATED RESPONSE TO SUSPICIOUS EVENTS
(a) Notify [Assignment: organization-defined incident response personnel (identified by
name and/or by role)] of detected suspicious events; and
(b) Take the following actions upon detection: [Assignment: organization-defined leastdisruptive actions to terminate suspicious events].
Discussion: Least-disruptive actions include initiating requests for human responses.
SYSTEM MONITORING | TESTING OF MONITORING TOOLS AND MECHANISMS
Test intrusion-monitoring tools and mechanisms [Assignment: organization-defined
frequency].
Discussion: Testing intrusion-monitoring tools and mechanisms is necessary to ensure that
the tools and mechanisms are operating correctly and continue to satisfy the monitoring
objectives of organizations. The frequency and depth of testing depends on the types of
tools and mechanisms used by organizations and the methods of deployment.
SYSTEM MONITORING | VISIBILITY OF ENCRYPTED COMMUNICATIONS
Make provisions so that [Assignment: organization-defined encrypted communications
traffic] is visible to [Assignment: organization-defined system monitoring tools and
mechanisms].
Discussion: Organizations balance the need to encrypt communications traffic to protect
data confidentiality with the need to maintain visibility into such traffic from a monitoring
perspective. Organizations determine whether the visibility requirement applies to internal
encrypted traffic, encrypted traffic intended for external destinations, or a subset of the
traffic types.
SYSTEM MONITORING | ANALYZE COMMUNICATIONS TRAFFIC ANOMALIES
Analyze outbound communications traffic at the external interfaces to the system and
selected [Assignment: organization-defined interior points within the system] to discover
anomalies.
Discussion: Organization-defined interior points include subnetworks and subsystems.
Anomalies within organizational systems include large file transfers, long-time persistent
connections, attempts to access information from unexpected locations, the use of unusual
protocols and ports, the use of unmonitored network protocols (e.g., IPv6 usage during IPv4
transition), and attempted communications with suspected malicious external addresses.
) SYSTEM MONITORING | AUTOMATED ORGANIZATION-GENERATED ALERTS
Alert [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles] using [Assignment:
organization-defined automated mechanisms] when the following indications of
inappropriate or unusual activities with security or privacy implications occur:
[Assignment: organization-defined activities that trigger alerts].
Discussion: Organizational personnel on the system alert notification list include system
administrators, mission or business owners, system owners, senior agency information
security officer, senior agency official for privacy, system security officers, or privacy officers.
Automated organization-generated alerts are the security alerts generated by organizations
and transmitted using automated means. The sources for organization-generated alerts are
focused on other entities such as suspicious activity reports and reports on potential insider
threats. In contrast to alerts generated by the organization, alerts generated by the system
in SI-4(5) focus on information sources that are internal to the systems, such as audit
records.
SYSTEM MONITORING | ANALYZE TRAFFIC AND EVENT PATTERNS
(a) Analyze communications traffic and event patterns for the system;
(b) Develop profiles representing common traffic and event patterns; and
(c) Use the traffic and event profiles in tuning system-monitoring devices.
Discussion: Identifying and understanding common communications traffic and event
patterns help organizations provide useful information to system monitoring devices to
more effectively identify suspicious or anomalous traffic and events when they occur. Such
information can help reduce the number of false positives and false negatives during system
monitoring
SYSTEM MONITORING | WIRELESS INTRUSION DETECTION
Employ a wireless intrusion detection system to identify rogue wireless devices and to
detect attack attempts and potential compromises or breaches to the system.
Discussion: Wireless signals may radiate beyond organizational facilities. Organizations
proactively search for unauthorized wireless connections, including the conduct of thorough
scans for unauthorized wireless access points. Wireless scans are not limited to those areas
within facilities containing systems but also include areas outside of facilities to verify that
unauthorized wireless access points are not connected to organizational systems.
SYSTEM MONITORING | WIRELESS TO WIRELINE COMMUNICATIONS
Employ an intrusion detection system to monitor wireless communications traffic as the
traffic passes from wireless to wireline networks.
Discussion: Wireless networks are inherently less secure than wired networks. For example,
wireless networks are more susceptible to eavesdroppers or traffic analysis than wireline
networks. When wireless to wireline communications exist, the wireless network could
become a port of entry into the wired network. Given the greater facility of unauthorized
network access via wireless access points compared to unauthorized wired network access
from within the physical boundaries of the system, additional monitoring of transitioning
traffic between wireless and wired networks may be necessary to detect malicious activities.
Employing intrusion detection systems to monitor wireless communications traffic helps to
ensure that the traffic does not contain malicious code prior to transitioning to the wireline
network.
SYSTEM MONITORING | CORRELATE MONITORING INFORMATION
Correlate information from monitoring tools and mechanisms employed throughout the
system.
Discussion: Correlating information from different system monitoring tools and mechanisms
can provide a more comprehensive view of system activity. Correlating system monitoring
tools and mechanisms that typically work in isolation—including malicious code protection
software, host monitoring, and network monitoring—can provide an organization-wide
monitoring view and may reveal otherwise unseen attack patterns. Understanding the
capabilities and limitations of diverse monitoring tools and mechanisms and how to
maximize the use of information generated by those tools and mechanisms can help
organizations develop, operate, and maintain effective monitoring programs. The correlation
of monitoring information is especially important during the transition from older to newer
technologies (e.g., transitioning from IPv4 to IPv6 network protocols)
SYSTEM MONITORING | INTEGRATED SITUATIONAL AWARENESS
Correlate information from monitoring physical, cyber, and supply chain activities to
achieve integrated, organization-wide situational awareness.
Discussion: Correlating monitoring information from a more diverse set of information
sources helps to achieve integrated situational awareness. Integrated situational awareness
from a combination of physical, cyber, and supply chain monitoring activities enhances the
capability of organizations to more quickly detect sophisticated attacks and investigate the
methods and techniques employed to carry out such attacks. In contrast to SI-4(16), which
correlates the various cyber monitoring information, integrated situational awareness is
intended to correlate monitoring beyond the cyber domain. Correlation of monitoring
information from multiple activities may help reveal attacks on organizations that are
operating across multiple attack vectors.
SYSTEM MONITORING | ANALYZE TRAFFIC AND COVERT EXFILTRATION
Analyze outbound communications traffic at external interfaces to the system and at the
following interior points to detect covert exfiltration of information: [Assignment:
organization-defined interior points within the system].
Discussion: Organization-defined interior points include subnetworks and subsystems.
Covert means that can be used to exfiltrate information include steganography.
SYSTEM MONITORING | RISK FOR INDIVIDUALS
Implement [Assignment: organization-defined additional monitoring] of individuals who
have been identified by [Assignment: organization-defined sources] as posing an increased
level of risk.
Discussion: Indications of increased risk from individuals can be obtained from different
sources, including personnel records, intelligence agencies, law enforcement organizations,
and other sources. The monitoring of individuals is coordinated with the management, legal,
security, privacy, and human resource officials who conduct such monitoring. Monitoring is
conducted in accordance with applicable laws, executive orders, directives, regulations,
policies, standards, and guidelines
SYSTEM MONITORING | PRIVILEGED USERS
Implement the following additional monitoring of privileged users: [Assignment:
organization-defined additional monitoring].
Discussion: Privileged users have access to more sensitive information, including securityrelated information, than the general user population. Access to such information means
that privileged users can potentially do greater damage to systems and organizations than
non-privileged users. Therefore, implementing additional monitoring on privileged users
helps to ensure that organizations can identify malicious activity at the earliest possible time
and take appropriate actions.
SYSTEM MONITORING | PROBATIONARY PERIODS
Implement the following additional monitoring of individuals during [Assignment:
organization-defined probationary period]: [Assignment: organization-defined additional
monitoring].
Discussion: During probationary periods, employees do not have permanent employment
status within organizations. Without such status or access to information that is resident on
the system, additional monitoring can help identify any potentially malicious activity or
inappropriate behavior.
) SYSTEM MONITORING | UNAUTHORIZED NETWORK SERVICES
(a) Detect network services that have not been authorized or approved by [Assignment:
organization-defined authorization or approval processes]; and
(b) [Selection (one or more): Audit; Alert [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or
roles]] when detected.
Discussion: Unauthorized or unapproved network services include services in serviceoriented architectures that lack organizational verification or validation and may therefore
be unreliable or serve as malicious rogues for valid services.
SYSTEM MONITORING | HOST-BASED DEVICES
Implement the following host-based monitoring mechanisms at [Assignment:
organization-defined system components]: [Assignment: organization-defined host-based
monitoring mechanisms].
Discussion: Host-based monitoring collects information about the host (or system in which it
resides). System components in which host-based monitoring can be implemented include
servers, notebook computers, and mobile devices. Organizations may consider employing
host-based monitoring mechanisms from multiple product developers or vendors.
) SYSTEM MONITORING | INDICATORS OF COMPROMISE
Discover, collect, and distribute to [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles],
indicators of compromise provided by [Assignment: organization-defined sources].
Discussion: Indicators of compromise (IOC) are forensic artifacts from intrusions that are
identified on organizational systems at the host or network level. IOCs provide valuable
information on systems that have been compromised. IOCs can include the creation of
registry key values. IOCs for network traffic include Universal Resource Locator or protocol
elements that indicate malicious code command and control servers. The rapid distribution
and adoption of IOCs can improve information security by reducing the time that systems
and organizations are vulnerable to the same exploit or attack. Threat indicators, signatures,
tactics, techniques, procedures, and other indicators of compromise may be available via
government and non-government cooperatives, including the Forum of Incident Response
and Security Teams, the United States Computer Emergency Readiness Team, the Defense
Industrial Base Cybersecurity Information Sharing Program, and the CERT Coordination
Center
SYSTEM MONITORING | OPTIMIZE NETWORK TRAFFIC ANALYSIS
Provide visibility into network traffic at external and key internal system interfaces to
optimize the effectiveness of monitoring devices.
Discussion: Encrypted traffic, asymmetric routing architectures, capacity and latency
limitations, and transitioning from older to newer technologies (e.g., IPv4 to IPv6 network
protocol transition) may result in blind spots for organizations when analyzing network
traffic. Collecting, decrypting, pre-processing, and distributing only relevant traffic to
monitoring devices can streamline the efficiency and use of devices and optimize traffic
analysis.