RS.CO-1: Personnel know their roles and order of operations when a response is needed
CONTINGENCY PLAN
Control:
a. Develop a contingency plan for the system that:
1. Identifies essential mission and business functions and associated contingency
requirements;
2. Provides recovery objectives, restoration priorities, and metrics;
3. Addresses contingency roles, responsibilities, assigned individuals with contact
information;
4. Addresses maintaining essential mission and business functions despite a system
disruption, compromise, or failure;
5. Addresses eventual, full system restoration without deterioration of the controls
originally planned and implemented;
6. Addresses the sharing of contingency information; and
7. Is reviewed and approved by [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles];
b. Distribute copies of the contingency plan to [Assignment: organization-defined key
contingency personnel (identified by name and/or by role) and organizational elements];
c. Coordinate contingency planning activities with incident handling activities;
d. Review the contingency plan for the system [Assignment: organization-defined frequency];
e. Update the contingency plan to address changes to the organization, system, or
environment of operation and problems encountered during contingency plan
implementation, execution, or testing;
f. Communicate contingency plan changes to [Assignment: organization-defined key
contingency personnel (identified by name and/or by role) and organizational elements];
g. Incorporate lessons learned from contingency plan testing, training, or actual contingency
activities into contingency testing and training; and
h. Protect the contingency plan from unauthorized disclosure and modification.
Discussion: Contingency planning for systems is part of an overall program for achieving
continuity of operations for organizational mission and business functions. Contingency planning
addresses system restoration and implementation of alternative mission or business processes
when systems are compromised or breached. Contingency planning is considered throughout the
system development life cycle and is a fundamental part of the system design. Systems can be
designed for redundancy, to provide backup capabilities, and for resilience. Contingency plans
reflect the degree of restoration required for organizational systems since not all systems need
to fully recover to achieve the level of continuity of operations desired. System recovery
objectives reflect applicable laws, executive orders, directives, regulations, policies, standards,
guidelines, organizational risk tolerance, and system impact level.
Actions addressed in contingency plans include orderly system degradation, system shutdown,
fallback to a manual mode, alternate information flows, and operating in modes reserved for
when systems are under attack. By coordinating contingency planning with incident handling
activities, organizations ensure that the necessary planning activities are in place and activated in
the event of an incident. Organizations consider whether continuity of operations during an
incident conflicts with the capability to automatically disable the system, as specified in IR-4(5).
Incident response planning is part of contingency planning for organizations and is addressed in
the IR (Incident Response) family.
CONTINGENCY PLAN | COORDINATE WITH RELATED PLANS
Coordinate contingency plan development with organizational elements responsible for
related plans.
Discussion: Plans that are related to contingency plans include Business Continuity Plans,
Disaster Recovery Plans, Critical Infrastructure Plans, Continuity of Operations Plans, Crisis
Communications Plans, Insider Threat Implementation Plans, Data Breach Response Plans,
Cyber Incident Response Plans, Breach Response Plans, and Occupant Emergency Plans.
CONTINGENCY PLAN | CAPACITY PLANNING
Conduct capacity planning so that necessary capacity for information processing,
telecommunications, and environmental support exists during contingency operations.
Discussion: Capacity planning is needed because different threats can result in a reduction
of the available processing, telecommunications, and support services intended to support
essential mission and business functions. Organizations anticipate degraded operations
during contingency operations and factor the degradation into capacity planning. For
capacity planning, environmental support refers to any environmental factor for which the
organization determines that it needs to provide support in a contingency situation, even if
in a degraded state. Such determinations are based on an organizational assessment of risk,
system categorization (impact level), and organizational risk tolerance.
CONTINGENCY PLAN | RESUME MISSION AND BUSINESS FUNCTIONS
Plan for the resumption of [Selection: all; essential] mission and business functions within
[Assignment: organization-defined time period] of contingency plan activation.
Discussion: Organizations may choose to conduct contingency planning activities to resume
mission and business functions as part of business continuity planning or as part of business
impact analyses. Organizations prioritize the resumption of mission and business functions.
The time period for resuming mission and business functions may be dependent on the
severity and extent of the disruptions to the system and its supporting infrastructure.
CONTINGENCY PLAN | CONTINUE MISSION AND BUSINESS FUNCTIONS
Plan for the continuance of [Selection: all; essential] mission and business functions with
minimal or no loss of operational continuity and sustains that continuity until full system
restoration at primary processing and/or storage sites.
Discussion: Organizations may choose to conduct the contingency planning activities to
continue mission and business functions as part of business continuity planning or business
impact analyses. Primary processing and/or storage sites defined by organizations as part of
contingency planning may change depending on the circumstances associated with the
contingency.
CONTINGENCY PLAN | ALTERNATE PROCESSING AND STORAGE SITES
Plan for the transfer of [Selection: all; essential] mission and business functions to
alternate processing and/or storage sites with minimal or no loss of operational continuity
and sustain that continuity through system restoration to primary processing and/or
storage sites.
Discussion: Organizations may choose to conduct contingency planning activities for
alternate processing and storage sites as part of business continuity planning or business
impact analyses. Primary processing and/or storage sites defined by organizations as part of
contingency planning may change depending on the circumstances associated with the
contingency.
CONTINGENCY PLAN | COORDINATE WITH EXTERNAL SERVICE PROVIDERS
Coordinate the contingency plan with the contingency plans of external service providers
to ensure that contingency requirements can be satisfied.
Discussion: When the capability of an organization to carry out its mission and business
functions is dependent on external service providers, developing a comprehensive and
timely contingency plan may become more challenging. When mission and business
functions are dependent on external service providers, organizations coordinate contingency
planning activities with the external entities to ensure that the individual plans reflect the
overall contingency needs of the organization.
CONTINGENCY PLAN | IDENTIFY CRITICAL ASSETS
Identify critical system assets supporting [Selection: all; essential] mission and business
functions.
Discussion: Organizations may choose to identify critical assets as part of criticality analysis,
business continuity planning, or business impact analyses. Organizations identify critical
system assets so that additional controls can be employed (beyond the controls routinely
implemented) to help ensure that organizational mission and business functions can
continue to be conducted during contingency operations. The identification of critical
information assets also facilitates the prioritization of organizational resources. Critical
system assets include technical and operational aspects. Technical aspects include system
components, information technology services, information technology products, and
mechanisms. Operational aspects include procedures (i.e., manually executed operations)
and personnel (i.e., individuals operating technical controls and/or executing manual
procedures). Organizational program protection plans can assist in identifying critical assets.
If critical assets are resident within or supported by external service providers, organizations
consider implementing CP-2(7) as a control enhancement.
CONTINGENCY TRAINING
Control:
a. Provide contingency training to system users consistent with assigned roles and
responsibilities:
1. Within [Assignment: organization-defined time period] of assuming a contingency role
or responsibility;
2. When required by system changes; and
3. [Assignment: organization-defined frequency] thereafter; and
b. Review and update contingency training content [Assignment: organization-defined
frequency] and following [Assignment: organization-defined events].
Discussion: Contingency training provided by organizations is linked to the assigned roles and
responsibilities of organizational personnel to ensure that the appropriate content and level of
detail is included in such training. For example, some individuals may only need to know when
and where to report for duty during contingency operations and if normal duties are affected;
system administrators may require additional training on how to establish systems at alternate
processing and storage sites; and organizational officials may receive more specific training on
how to conduct mission-essential functions in designated off-site locations and how to establish
communications with other governmental entities for purposes of coordination on contingencyrelated activities. Training for contingency roles or responsibilities reflects the specific continuity
requirements in the contingency plan. Events that may precipitate an update to contingency
training content include, but are not limited to, contingency plan testing or an actual contingency
(lessons learned), assessment or audit findings, security incidents or breaches, or changes in
laws, executive orders, directives, regulations, policies, standards, and guidelines. At the
discretion of the organization, participation in a contingency plan test or exercise, including
lessons learned sessions subsequent to the test or exercise, may satisfy contingency plan training
requirements
CONTINGENCY TRAINING | SIMULATED EVENTS
Incorporate simulated events into contingency training to facilitate effective response by
personnel in crisis situations.
Discussion: The use of simulated events creates an environment for personnel to experience
actual threat events, including cyber-attacks that disable websites, ransomware attacks that
encrypt organizational data on servers, hurricanes that damage or destroy organizational
facilities, or hardware or software failures.
CONTINGENCY TRAINING | MECHANISMS USED IN TRAINING ENVIRONMENTS
Employ mechanisms used in operations to provide a more thorough and realistic
contingency training environment.
Discussion: Operational mechanisms refer to processes that have been established to
accomplish an organizational goal or a system that supports a particular organizational
mission or business objective. Actual mission and business processes, systems, and/or
facilities may be used to generate simulated events and enhance the realism of simulated
events during contingency training.
INCIDENT RESPONSE TESTING
Control: Test the effectiveness of the incident response capability for the system [Assignment:
organization-defined frequency] using the following tests: [Assignment: organization-defined
tests].
Discussion: Organizations test incident response capabilities to determine their effectiveness
and identify potential weaknesses or deficiencies. Incident response testing includes the use of
checklists, walk-through or tabletop exercises, and simulations (parallel or full interrupt). Incident
response testing can include a determination of the effects on organizational operations and
assets and individuals due to incident response. The use of qualitative and quantitative data aids
in determining the effectiveness of incident response processes.
INCIDENT RESPONSE TESTING | AUTOMATED TESTING
Test the incident response capability using [Assignment: organization-defined automated
mechanisms].
Discussion: Organizations use automated mechanisms to more thoroughly and effectively
test incident response capabilities. This can be accomplished by providing more complete
coverage of incident response issues, selecting realistic test scenarios and environments, and
stressing the response capability.
INCIDENT RESPONSE TESTING | COORDINATION WITH RELATED PLANS
Coordinate incident response testing with organizational elements responsible for related
plans.
Discussion: Organizational plans related to incident response testing include business
continuity plans, disaster recovery plans, continuity of operations plans, contingency plans,
crisis communications plans, critical infrastructure plans, and occupant emergency plans.
INCIDENT RESPONSE TESTING | CONTINUOUS IMPROVEMENT
Use qualitative and quantitative data from testing to:
(a) Determine the effectiveness of incident response processes;
(b) Continuously improve incident response processes; and
(c) Provide incident response measures and metrics that are accurate, consistent, and in a
reproducible format.
Discussion: To help incident response activities function as intended, organizations may use
metrics and evaluation criteria to assess incident response programs as part of an effort to
continually improve response performance. These efforts facilitate improvement in incident
response efficacy and lessen the impact of incidents.
INCIDENT RESPONSE PLAN
Control:
a. Develop an incident response plan that:
1. Provides the organization with a roadmap for implementing its incident response
capability;
2. Describes the structure and organization of the incident response capability;
3. Provides a high-level approach for how the incident response capability fits into the
overall organization;
4. Meets the unique requirements of the organization, which relate to mission, size,
structure, and functions;
5. Defines reportable incidents;
6. Provides metrics for measuring the incident response capability within the organization;
7. Defines the resources and management support needed to effectively maintain and
mature an incident response capability;
8. Addresses the sharing of incident information;
9. Is reviewed and approved by [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles]
[Assignment: organization-defined frequency]; and
10. Explicitly designates responsibility for incident response to [Assignment: organizationdefined entities, personnel, or roles].
b. Distribute copies of the incident response plan to [Assignment: organization-defined incident
response personnel (identified by name and/or by role) and organizational elements];
c. Update the incident response plan to address system and organizational changes or
problems encountered during plan implementation, execution, or testing;
d. Communicate incident response plan changes to [Assignment: organization-defined incident
response personnel (identified by name and/or by role) and organizational elements]; and
e. Protect the incident response plan from unauthorized disclosure and modification.
Discussion: It is important that organizations develop and implement a coordinated approach to
incident response. Organizational mission and business functions determine the structure of
incident response capabilities. As part of the incident response capabilities, organizations
consider the coordination and sharing of information with external organizations, including
external service providers and other organizations involved in the supply chain. For incidents
involving personally identifiable information (i.e., breaches), include a process to determine
whether notice to oversight organizations or affected individuals is appropriate and provide that
notice accordingly.
INCIDENT RESPONSE PLAN | BREACHES
Include the following in the Incident Response Plan for breaches involving personally
identifiable information:
(a) A process to determine if notice to individuals or other organizations, including
oversight organizations, is needed;
(b) An assessment process to determine the extent of the harm, embarrassment,
inconvenience, or unfairness to affected individuals and any mechanisms to mitigate
such harms; and
(c) Identification of applicable privacy requirements.
Discussion: Organizations may be required by law, regulation, or policy to follow specific
procedures relating to breaches, including notice to individuals, affected organizations, and
oversight bodies; standards of harm; and mitigation or other specific requirements.