RS.AN-5: Processes are established to receive, analyze and respond to vulnerabilities disclosed to the organization from internal and external sources (e.g. internal testing, security bulletins, or security researchers)
SECURITY ALERTS, ADVISORIES, AND DIRECTIVES
Control:
a. Receive system security alerts, advisories, and directives from [Assignment: organizationdefined external organizations] on an ongoing basis;
b. Generate internal security alerts, advisories, and directives as deemed necessary;
c. Disseminate security alerts, advisories, and directives to: [Selection (one or more):
[Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles]; [Assignment: organization-defined
elements within the organization]; [Assignment: organization-defined external
organizations]]; and
d. Implement security directives in accordance with established time frames, or notify the
issuing organization of the degree of noncompliance.
Discussion: The Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA) generates security alerts
and advisories to maintain situational awareness throughout the Federal Government. Security
directives are issued by OMB or other designated organizations with the responsibility and
authority to issue such directives. Compliance with security directives is essential due to the
critical nature of many of these directives and the potential (immediate) adverse effects on
organizational operations and assets, individuals, other organizations, and the Nation should the
directives not be implemented in a timely manner. External organizations include supply chain
partners, external mission or business partners, external service providers, and other peer or
supporting organizations.
SECURITY ALERTS, ADVISORIES, AND DIRECTIVES | AUTOMATED ALERTS AND ADVISORIES
Broadcast security alert and advisory information throughout the organization using
[Assignment: organization-defined automated mechanisms].
Discussion: The significant number of changes to organizational systems and environments
of operation requires the dissemination of security-related information to a variety of
organizational entities that have a direct interest in the success of organizational mission and
business functions. Based on information provided by security alerts and advisories, changes
may be required at one or more of the three levels related to the management of risk,
including the governance level, mission and business process level, and the information
system level.
SECURITY AND PRIVACY GROUPS AND ASSOCIATIONS
Control: Establish and institutionalize contact with selected groups and associations within the
security and privacy communities:
a. To facilitate ongoing security and privacy education and training for organizational
personnel;
b. To maintain currency with recommended security and privacy practices, techniques, and
technologies; and
c. To share current security and privacy information, including threats, vulnerabilities, and
incidents.
Discussion: Ongoing contact with security and privacy groups and associations is important in an
environment of rapidly changing technologies and threats. Groups and associations include
special interest groups, professional associations, forums, news groups, users’ groups, and peer
groups of security and privacy professionals in similar organizations. Organizations select security
and privacy groups and associations based on mission and business functions. Organizations
share threat, vulnerability, and incident information as well as contextual insights, compliance
techniques, and privacy problems consistent with applicable laws, executive orders, directives,
policies, regulations, standards, and guidelines