PR.MA-1: Maintenance and repair of organizational assets are performed and logged, with approved and controlled tools
CONTROLLED MAINTENANCE
Control:
a. Schedule, document, and review records of maintenance, repair, and replacement on
system components in accordance with manufacturer or vendor specifications and/or
organizational requirements;
b. Approve and monitor all maintenance activities, whether performed on site or remotely and
whether the system or system components are serviced on site or removed to another
location;
c. Require that [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles] explicitly approve the
removal of the system or system components from organizational facilities for off-site
maintenance, repair, or replacement;
d. Sanitize equipment to remove the following information from associated media prior to
removal from organizational facilities for off-site maintenance, repair, or replacement:
[Assignment: organization-defined information];
e. Check all potentially impacted controls to verify that the controls are still functioning
properly following maintenance, repair, or replacement actions; and
f. Include the following information in organizational maintenance records: [Assignment:
organization-defined information].
Discussion: Controlling system maintenance addresses the information security aspects of the
system maintenance program and applies to all types of maintenance to system components
conducted by local or nonlocal entities. Maintenance includes peripherals such as scanners,
copiers, and printers. Information necessary for creating effective maintenance records includes
the date and time of maintenance, a description of the maintenance performed, names of the
individuals or group performing the maintenance, name of the escort, and system components
or equipment that are removed or replaced. Organizations consider supply chain-related risks
associated with replacement components for systems
CONTROLLED MAINTENANCE | AUTOMATED MAINTENANCE ACTIVITIES
(a) Schedule, conduct, and document maintenance, repair, and replacement actions for
the system using [Assignment: organization-defined automated mechanisms]; and
(b) Produce up-to date, accurate, and complete records of all maintenance, repair, and
replacement actions requested, scheduled, in process, and completed.
Discussion: The use of automated mechanisms to manage and control system maintenance
programs and activities helps to ensure the generation of timely, accurate, complete, and
consistent maintenance records
MAINTENANCE TOOLS
Control:
a. Approve, control, and monitor the use of system maintenance tools; and
Review previously approved system maintenance tools [Assignment: organization-defined
frequency].
Discussion: Approving, controlling, monitoring, and reviewing maintenance tools address
security-related issues associated with maintenance tools that are not within system
authorization boundaries and are used specifically for diagnostic and repair actions on
organizational systems. Organizations have flexibility in determining roles for the approval of
maintenance tools and how that approval is documented. A periodic review of maintenance
tools facilitates the withdrawal of approval for outdated, unsupported, irrelevant, or no-longerused tools. Maintenance tools can include hardware, software, and firmware items and may be
pre-installed, brought in with maintenance personnel on media, cloud-based, or downloaded
from a website. Such tools can be vehicles for transporting malicious code, either intentionally or
unintentionally, into a facility and subsequently into systems. Maintenance tools can include
hardware and software diagnostic test equipment and packet sniffers. The hardware and
software components that support maintenance and are a part of the system (including the
software implementing utilities such as “ping,” “ls,” “ipconfig,” or the hardware and software
implementing the monitoring port of an Ethernet switch) are not addressed by maintenance
tools.
MAINTENANCE TOOLS | INSPECT TOOLS
Inspect the maintenance tools used by maintenance personnel for improper or
unauthorized modifications.
Discussion: Maintenance tools can be directly brought into a facility by maintenance
personnel or downloaded from a vendor’s website. If, upon inspection of the maintenance
tools, organizations determine that the tools have been modified in an improper manner or
the tools contain malicious code, the incident is handled consistent with organizational
policies and procedures for incident handling.
MAINTENANCE TOOLS | INSPECT MEDIA
Check media containing diagnostic and test programs for malicious code before the media
are used in the system.
Discussion: If, upon inspection of media containing maintenance, diagnostic, and test
programs, organizations determine that the media contains malicious code, the incident is
handled consistent with organizational incident handling policies and procedures.
MAINTENANCE TOOLS | PREVENT UNAUTHORIZED REMOVAL
Prevent the removal of maintenance equipment containing organizational information by:
(a) Verifying that there is no organizational information contained on the equipment;
(b) Sanitizing or destroying the equipment;
(c) Retaining the equipment within the facility; or
(d) Obtaining an exemption from [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles]
explicitly authorizing removal of the equipment from the facility.
Discussion: Organizational information includes all information owned by organizations and
any information provided to organizations for which the organizations serve as information
stewards.
MAINTENANCE TOOLS | RESTRICTED TOOL USE
Restrict the use of maintenance tools to authorized personnel only.
Discussion: Restricting the use of maintenance tools to only authorized personnel applies to
systems that are used to carry out maintenance functions.
MAINTENANCE TOOLS | EXECUTION WITH PRIVILEGE
Monitor the use of maintenance tools that execute with increased privilege.
Discussion: Maintenance tools that execute with increased system privilege can result in
unauthorized access to organizational information and assets that would otherwise be
inaccessible
MAINTENANCE TOOLS | SOFTWARE UPDATES AND PATCHES
Inspect maintenance tools to ensure the latest software updates and patches are installed.
Discussion: Maintenance tools using outdated and/or unpatched software can provide a
threat vector for adversaries and result in a significant vulnerability for organizations
MAINTENANCE PERSONNEL
Control:
a. Establish a process for maintenance personnel authorization and maintain a list of
authorized maintenance organizations or personnel;
b. Verify that non-escorted personnel performing maintenance on the system possess the
required access authorizations; and
c. Designate organizational personnel with required access authorizations and technical
competence to supervise the maintenance activities of personnel who do not possess the
required access authorizations.
Discussion: Maintenance personnel refers to individuals who perform hardware or software
maintenance on organizational systems, while PE-2 addresses physical access for individuals
whose maintenance duties place them within the physical protection perimeter of the systems.
Technical competence of supervising individuals relates to the maintenance performed on the
systems, while having required access authorizations refers to maintenance on and near the
systems. Individuals not previously identified as authorized maintenance personnel—such as
information technology manufacturers, vendors, systems integrators, and consultants—may
require privileged access to organizational systems, such as when they are required to conduct
maintenance activities with little or no notice. Based on organizational assessments of risk,
organizations may issue temporary credentials to these individuals. Temporary credentials may
be for one-time use or for very limited time periods.
MAINTENANCE PERSONNEL | INDIVIDUALS WITHOUT APPROPRIATE ACCESS
(a) Implement procedures for the use of maintenance personnel that lack appropriate
security clearances or are not U.S. citizens, that include the following requirements:
(1) Maintenance personnel who do not have needed access authorizations,
clearances, or formal access approvals are escorted and supervised during the
performance of maintenance and diagnostic activities on the system by approved
organizational personnel who are fully cleared, have appropriate access
authorizations, and are technically qualified; and
(2) Prior to initiating maintenance or diagnostic activities by personnel who do not
have needed access authorizations, clearances or formal access approvals, all
volatile information storage components within the system are sanitized and all
nonvolatile storage media are removed or physically disconnected from the
system and secured; and
(b) Develop and implement [Assignment: organization-defined alternate controls] in the
event a system component cannot be sanitized, removed, or disconnected from the
system.
Discussion: Procedures for individuals who lack appropriate security clearances or who are
not U.S. citizens are intended to deny visual and electronic access to classified or controlled
unclassified information contained on organizational systems. Procedures for the use of
maintenance personnel can be documented in security plans for the systems.
MAINTENANCE PERSONNEL | SECURITY CLEARANCES FOR CLASSIFIED SYSTEMS
Verify that personnel performing maintenance and diagnostic activities on a system
processing, storing, or transmitting classified information possess security clearances and
formal access approvals for at least the highest classification level and for compartments
of information on the system.
Discussion: Personnel who conduct maintenance on organizational systems may be exposed
to classified information during the course of their maintenance activities. To mitigate the
inherent risk of such exposure, organizations use maintenance personnel that are cleared
(i.e., possess security clearances) to the classification level of the information stored on the
system.
MAINTENANCE PERSONNEL | CITIZENSHIP REQUIREMENTS FOR CLASSIFIED SYSTEMS
Verify that personnel performing maintenance and diagnostic activities on a system
processing, storing, or transmitting classified information are U.S. citizens.
Discussion: Personnel who conduct maintenance on organizational systems may be exposed
to classified information during the course of their maintenance activities. If access to
classified information on organizational systems is restricted to U.S. citizens, the same
restriction is applied to personnel performing maintenance on those systems.
MAINTENANCE PERSONNEL | FOREIGN NATIONALS
Ensure that:
(a) Foreign nationals with appropriate security clearances are used to conduct
maintenance and diagnostic activities on classified systems only when the systems are
jointly owned and operated by the United States and foreign allied governments, or
owned and operated solely by foreign allied governments; and
(b) Approvals, consents, and detailed operational conditions regarding the use of foreign
nationals to conduct maintenance and diagnostic activities on classified systems are
fully documented within Memoranda of Agreements.
Discussion: Personnel who conduct maintenance and diagnostic activities on organizational
systems may be exposed to classified information. If non-U.S. citizens are permitted to
perform maintenance and diagnostics activities on classified systems, then additional vetting
is required to ensure agreements and restrictions are not being violated.
MAINTENANCE PERSONNEL | NON-SYSTEM MAINTENANCE
Ensure that non-escorted personnel performing maintenance activities not directly
associated with the system but in the physical proximity of the system, have required
access authorizations.
Discussion: Personnel who perform maintenance activities in other capacities not directly
related to the system include physical plant personnel and custodial personnel
TIMELY MAINTENANCE
Control: Obtain maintenance support and/or spare parts for [Assignment: organization-defined
system components] within [Assignment: organization-defined time period] of failure.
Discussion: Organizations specify the system components that result in increased risk to
organizational operations and assets, individuals, other organizations, or the Nation when the
functionality provided by those components is not operational. Organizational actions to obtain
maintenance support include having appropriate contracts in place
TIMELY MAINTENANCE | PREVENTIVE MAINTENANCE
Perform preventive maintenance on [Assignment: organization-defined system
components] at [Assignment: organization-defined time intervals].
Discussion: Preventive maintenance includes proactive care and the servicing of system
components to maintain organizational equipment and facilities in satisfactory operating
condition. Such maintenance provides for the systematic inspection, tests, measurements,
adjustments, parts replacement, detection, and correction of incipient failures either before
they occur or before they develop into major defects. The primary goal of preventive
maintenance is to avoid or mitigate the consequences of equipment failures. Preventive
maintenance is designed to preserve and restore equipment reliability by replacing worn
components before they fail. Methods of determining what preventive (or other) failure
management policies to apply include original equipment manufacturer recommendations;
statistical failure records; expert opinion; maintenance that has already been conducted on
similar equipment; requirements of codes, laws, or regulations within a jurisdiction; or
measured values and performance indications.
TIMELY MAINTENANCE | PREDICTIVE MAINTENANCE
Perform predictive maintenance on [Assignment: organization-defined system
components] at [Assignment: organization-defined time intervals].
Discussion: Predictive maintenance evaluates the condition of equipment by performing
periodic or continuous (online) equipment condition monitoring. The goal of predictive
maintenance is to perform maintenance at a scheduled time when the maintenance activity
is most cost-effective and before the equipment loses performance within a threshold. The
predictive component of predictive maintenance stems from the objective of predicting the
future trend of the equipment's condition. The predictive maintenance approach employs
principles of statistical process control to determine at what point in the future maintenance
activities will be appropriate. Most predictive maintenance inspections are performed while
equipment is in service, thus minimizing disruption of normal system operations. Predictive
maintenance can result in substantial cost savings and higher system reliability.
TIMELY MAINTENANCE | AUTOMATED SUPPORT FOR PREDICTIVE MAINTENANCE
Transfer predictive maintenance data to a maintenance management system using
[Assignment: organization-defined automated mechanisms].
Discussion: A computerized maintenance management system maintains a database of
information about the maintenance operations of organizations and automates the
processing of equipment condition data to trigger maintenance planning, execution, and
reporting.