PR.DS-5: Protections against data leaks are implemented
INFORMATION FLOW ENFORCEMENT
Control: Enforce approved authorizations for controlling the flow of information within the
system and between connected systems based on [Assignment: organization-defined
information flow control policies].
Discussion: Information flow control regulates where information can travel within a system and
between systems (in contrast to who is allowed to access the information) and without regard to
subsequent accesses to that information. Flow control restrictions include blocking external
traffic that claims to be from within the organization, keeping export-controlled information
from being transmitted in the clear to the Internet, restricting web requests that are not from
the internal web proxy server, and limiting information transfers between organizations based
on data structures and content. Transferring information between organizations may require an
agreement specifying how the information flow is enforced (see CA-3). Transferring information
between systems in different security or privacy domains with different security or privacy
policies introduces the risk that such transfers violate one or more domain security or privacy
policies. In such situations, information owners/stewards provide guidance at designated policy
enforcement points between connected systems. Organizations consider mandating specific
architectural solutions to enforce specific security and privacy policies. Enforcement includes
prohibiting information transfers between connected systems (i.e., allowing access only),
verifying write permissions before accepting information from another security or privacy
domain or connected system, employing hardware mechanisms to enforce one-way information
flows, and implementing trustworthy regrading mechanisms to reassign security or privacy
attributes and labels.
Organizations commonly employ information flow control policies and enforcement mechanisms
to control the flow of information between designated sources and destinations within systems
and between connected systems. Flow control is based on the characteristics of the information
and/or the information path. Enforcement occurs, for example, in boundary protection devices
that employ rule sets or establish configuration settings that restrict system services, provide a
packet-filtering capability based on header information, or provide a message-filtering capability
based on message content. Organizations also consider the trustworthiness of filtering and/or
inspection mechanisms (i.e., hardware, firmware, and software components) that are critical to
information flow enforcement. Control enhancements 3 through 32 primarily address crossdomain solution needs that focus on more advanced filtering techniques, in-depth analysis, and
stronger flow enforcement mechanisms implemented in cross-domain products, such as highassurance guards. Such capabilities are generally not available in commercial off-the-shelf
products. Information flow enforcement also applies to control plane traffic (e.g., routing and
DNS).
INFORMATION FLOW ENFORCEMENT | OBJECT SECURITY AND PRIVACY ATTRIBUTES
Use [Assignment: organization-defined security and privacy attributes] associated with
[Assignment: organization-defined information, source, and destination objects] to enforce
[Assignment: organization-defined information flow control policies] as a basis for flow
control decisions.
Discussion: Information flow enforcement mechanisms compare security and privacy
attributes associated with information (i.e., data content and structure) and source and
destination objects and respond appropriately when the enforcement mechanisms
encounter information flows not explicitly allowed by information flow policies. For
example, an information object labeled Secret would be allowed to flow to a destination
object labeled Secret, but an information object labeled Top Secret would not be allowed to
flow to a destination object labeled Secret. A dataset of personally identifiable information
may be tagged with restrictions against combining with other types of datasets and, thus,
would not be allowed to flow to the restricted dataset. Security and privacy attributes can
also include source and destination addresses employed in traffic filter firewalls. Flow
enforcement using explicit security or privacy attributes can be used, for example, to control
the release of certain types of information
INFORMATION FLOW ENFORCEMENT | PROCESSING DOMAINS
Use protected processing domains to enforce [Assignment: organization-defined
information flow control policies] as a basis for flow control decisions.
Discussion: Protected processing domains within systems are processing spaces that have
controlled interactions with other processing spaces, enabling control of information flows
between these spaces and to/from information objects. A protected processing domain can
be provided, for example, by implementing domain and type enforcement. In domain and
type enforcement, system processes are assigned to domains, information is identified by
types, and information flows are controlled based on allowed information accesses (i.e.,
determined by domain and type), allowed signaling among domains, and allowed process
transitions to other domains
INFORMATION FLOW ENFORCEMENT | DYNAMIC INFORMATION FLOW CONTROL
Enforce [Assignment: organization-defined information flow control policies].
Discussion: Organizational policies regarding dynamic information flow control include
allowing or disallowing information flows based on changing conditions or mission or
operational considerations. Changing conditions include changes in risk tolerance due to
changes in the immediacy of mission or business needs, changes in the threat environment,
and detection of potentially harmful or adverse events.
INFORMATION FLOW ENFORCEMENT | FLOW CONTROL OF ENCRYPTED INFORMATION
Prevent encrypted information from bypassing [Assignment: organization-defined
information flow control mechanisms] by [Selection (one or more): decrypting the
information; blocking the flow of the encrypted information; terminating communications
sessions attempting to pass encrypted information; [Assignment: organization-defined
procedure or method]].
Discussion: Flow control mechanisms include content checking, security policy filters, and
data type identifiers. The term encryption is extended to cover encoded data not recognized
by filtering mechanisms.
INFORMATION FLOW ENFORCEMENT | EMBEDDED DATA TYPES
Enforce [Assignment: organization-defined limitations] on embedding data types within
other data types.
Discussion: Embedding data types within other data types may result in reduced flow
control effectiveness. Data type embedding includes inserting files as objects within other
files and using compressed or archived data types that may include multiple embedded data
types. Limitations on data type embedding consider the levels of embedding and prohibit
levels of data type embedding that are beyond the capability of the inspection tools.
INFORMATION FLOW ENFORCEMENT | METADATA
Enforce information flow control based on [Assignment: organization-defined metadata].
Discussion: Metadata is information that describes the characteristics of data. Metadata can
include structural metadata describing data structures or descriptive metadata describing
data content. Enforcement of allowed information flows based on metadata enables simpler
and more effective flow control. Organizations consider the trustworthiness of metadata
regarding data accuracy (i.e., knowledge that the metadata values are correct with respect
to the data), data integrity (i.e., protecting against unauthorized changes to metadata tags),
and the binding of metadata to the data payload (i.e., employing sufficiently strong binding
techniques with appropriate assurance).
INFORMATION FLOW ENFORCEMENT | ONE-WAY FLOW MECHANISMS
Enforce one-way information flows through hardware-based flow control mechanisms.
Discussion: One-way flow mechanisms may also be referred to as a unidirectional network,
unidirectional security gateway, or data diode. One-way flow mechanisms can be used to
prevent data from being exported from a higher impact or classified domain or system while
permitting data from a lower impact or unclassified domain or system to be imported.
INFORMATION FLOW ENFORCEMENT | SECURITY AND PRIVACY POLICY FILTERS
(a) Enforce information flow control using [Assignment: organization-defined security or
privacy policy filters] as a basis for flow control decisions for [Assignment:
organization-defined information flows]; and
(b) [Selection (one or more): Block; Strip; Modify; Quarantine] data after a filter
processing failure in accordance with [Assignment: organization-defined security or
privacy policy].
Discussion: Organization-defined security or privacy policy filters can address data
structures and content. For example, security or privacy policy filters for data structures can
check for maximum file lengths, maximum field sizes, and data/file types (for structured and
unstructured data). Security or privacy policy filters for data content can check for specific
words, enumerated values or data value ranges, and hidden content. Structured data
permits the interpretation of data content by applications. Unstructured data refers to
digital information without a data structure or with a data structure that does not facilitate
the development of rule sets to address the impact or classification level of the information
conveyed by the data or the flow enforcement decisions. Unstructured data consists of
bitmap objects that are inherently non-language-based (i.e., image, video, or audio files) and
textual objects that are based on written or printed languages. Organizations can implement
more than one security or privacy policy filter to meet information flow control objectives.
INFORMATION FLOW ENFORCEMENT | HUMAN REVIEWS
Enforce the use of human reviews for [Assignment: organization-defined information
flows] under the following conditions: [Assignment: organization-defined conditions].
Discussion: Organizations define security or privacy policy filters for all situations where
automated flow control decisions are possible. When a fully automated flow control decision
is not possible, then a human review may be employed in lieu of or as a complement to
automated security or privacy policy filtering. Human reviews may also be employed as
deemed necessary by organizations.
INFORMATION FLOW ENFORCEMENT | ENABLE AND DISABLE SECURITY OR PRIVACY POLICY FILTERS
Provide the capability for privileged administrators to enable and disable [Assignment:
organization-defined security or privacy policy filters] under the following conditions:
[Assignment: organization-defined conditions].
Discussion: For example, as allowed by the system authorization, administrators can enable
security or privacy policy filters to accommodate approved data types. Administrators also
have the capability to select the filters that are executed on a specific data flow based on the
type of data that is being transferred, the source and destination security domains, and
other security or privacy relevant features, as needed.
INFORMATION FLOW ENFORCEMENT | CONFIGURATION OF SECURITY OR PRIVACY POLICY FILTERS
Provide the capability for privileged administrators to configure [Assignment:
organization-defined security or privacy policy filters] to support different security or
privacy policies.
Discussion: Documentation contains detailed information for configuring security or privacy
policy filters. For example, administrators can configure security or privacy policy filters to
include the list of inappropriate words that security or privacy policy mechanisms check in
accordance with the definitions provided by organizations.
INFORMATION FLOW ENFORCEMENT | DATA TYPE IDENTIFIERS
When transferring information between different security domains, use [Assignment:
organization-defined data type identifiers] to validate data essential for information flow
decisions.
Discussion: Data type identifiers include filenames, file types, file signatures or tokens, and
multiple internal file signatures or tokens. Systems only allow transfer of data that is
compliant with data type format specifications. Identification and validation of data types is
based on defined specifications associated with each allowed data format. The filename and
number alone are not used for data type identification. Content is validated syntactically and
semantically against its specification to ensure that it is the proper data type
INFORMATION FLOW ENFORCEMENT | DECOMPOSITION INTO POLICY-RELEVANT SUBCOMPONENTS
When transferring information between different security domains, decompose
information into [Assignment: organization-defined policy-relevant subcomponents] for
submission to policy enforcement mechanisms.
Discussion: Decomposing information into policy-relevant subcomponents prior to
information transfer facilitates policy decisions on source, destination, certificates,
classification, attachments, and other security- or privacy-related component differentiators.
Policy enforcement mechanisms apply filtering, inspection, and/or sanitization rules to the
policy-relevant subcomponents of information to facilitate flow enforcement prior to
transferring such information to different security domains.
INFORMATION FLOW ENFORCEMENT | SECURITY OR PRIVACY POLICY FILTER CONSTRAINTS
When transferring information between different security domains, implement
[Assignment: organization-defined security or privacy policy filters] requiring fully
enumerated formats that restrict data structure and content.
Discussion: Data structure and content restrictions reduce the range of potential malicious
or unsanctioned content in cross-domain transactions. Security or privacy policy filters that
restrict data structures include restricting file sizes and field lengths. Data content policy
filters include encoding formats for character sets, restricting character data fields to only
contain alpha-numeric characters, prohibiting special characters, and validating schema
structures.
INFORMATION FLOW ENFORCEMENT | DETECTION OF UNSANCTIONED INFORMATION
When transferring information between different security domains, examine the
information for the presence of [Assignment: organization-defined unsanctioned
information] and prohibit the transfer of such information in accordance with the
[Assignment: organization-defined security or privacy policy].
Discussion: Unsanctioned information includes malicious code, information that is
inappropriate for release from the source network, or executable code that could disrupt or
harm the services or systems on the destination network.
INFORMATION FLOW ENFORCEMENT | DOMAIN AUTHENTICATION
Uniquely identify and authenticate source and destination points by [Selection (one or
more): organization; system; application; service; individual] for information transfer.
Discussion: Attribution is a critical component of a security and privacy concept of
operations. The ability to identify source and destination points for information flowing
within systems allows the forensic reconstruction of events and encourages policy
compliance by attributing policy violations to specific organizations or individuals. Successful
domain authentication requires that system labels distinguish among systems, organizations,
and individuals involved in preparing, sending, receiving, or disseminating information.
Attribution also allows organizations to better maintain the lineage of personally identifiable
information processing as it flows through systems and can facilitate consent tracking, as
well as correction, deletion, or access requests from individuals
INFORMATION FLOW ENFORCEMENT | VALIDATION OF METADATA
When transferring information between different security domains, implement
[Assignment: organization-defined security or privacy policy filters] on metadata.
Discussion: All information (including metadata and the data to which the metadata applies)
is subject to filtering and inspection. Some organizations distinguish between metadata and
data payloads (i.e., only the data to which the metadata is bound). Other organizations do
not make such distinctions and consider metadata and the data to which the metadata
applies to be part of the payload.
INFORMATION FLOW ENFORCEMENT | APPROVED SOLUTIONS
Employ [Assignment: organization-defined solutions in approved configurations] to control
the flow of [Assignment: organization-defined information] across security domains.
Discussion: Organizations define approved solutions and configurations in cross-domain
policies and guidance in accordance with the types of information flows across classification
boundaries. The National Security Agency (NSA) National Cross Domain Strategy and
Management Office provides a listing of approved cross-domain solutions. Contact
ncdsmo@nsa.gov for more information
INFORMATION FLOW ENFORCEMENT | PHYSICAL OR LOGICAL SEPARATION OF INFORMATION FLOWS
Separate information flows logically or physically using [Assignment: organization-defined
mechanisms and/or techniques] to accomplish [Assignment: organization-defined required
separations by types of information].
Discussion: Enforcing the separation of information flows associated with defined types of
data can enhance protection by ensuring that information is not commingled while in transit
and by enabling flow control by transmission paths that are not otherwise achievable. Types
of separable information include inbound and outbound communications traffic, service
requests and responses, and information of differing security impact or classification levels.
)INFORMATION FLOW ENFORCEMENT | ACCESS ONLY
Provide access from a single device to computing platforms, applications, or data residing
in multiple different security domains, while preventing information flow between the
different security domains.
Discussion: The system provides a capability for users to access each connected security
domain without providing any mechanisms to allow users to transfer data or information
between the different security domains. An example of an access-only solution is a terminal
that provides a user access to information with different security classifications while
assuredly keeping the information separate.
INFORMATION FLOW ENFORCEMENT | MODIFY NON-RELEASABLE INFORMATION
When transferring information between different security domains, modify non-releasable
information by implementing [Assignment: organization-defined modification action].
Discussion: Modifying non-releasable information can help prevent a data spill or attack
when information is transferred across security domains. Modification actions include
masking, permutation, alteration, removal, or redaction.
INFORMATION FLOW ENFORCEMENT | INTERNAL NORMALIZED FORMAT
When transferring information between different security domains, parse incoming data
into an internal normalized format and regenerate the data to be consistent with its
intended specification.
Discussion: Converting data into normalized forms is one of most of effective mechanisms
to stop malicious attacks and large classes of data exfiltration.
INFORMATION FLOW ENFORCEMENT | DATA SANITIZATION
When transferring information between different security domains, sanitize data to
minimize [Selection (one or more): delivery of malicious content, command and control of
malicious code, malicious code augmentation, and steganography encoded data; spillage
of sensitive information] in accordance with [Assignment: organization-defined policy]].
Discussion: Data sanitization is the process of irreversibly removing or destroying data
stored on a memory device (e.g., hard drives, flash memory/solid state drives, mobile
devices, CDs, and DVDs) or in hard copy form.
)INFORMATION FLOW ENFORCEMENT | AUDIT FILTERING ACTIONS
When transferring information between different security domains, record and audit
content filtering actions and results for the information being filtered.
Discussion: Content filtering is the process of inspecting information as it traverses a crossdomain solution and determines if the information meets a predefined policy. Content
filtering actions and the results of filtering actions are recorded for individual messages to
ensure that the correct filter actions were applied. Content filter reports are used to assist in
troubleshooting actions by, for example, determining why message content was modified
and/or why it failed the filtering process. Audit events are defined in AU-2. Audit records are
generated in AU-12.
INFORMATION FLOW ENFORCEMENT | REDUNDANT/INDEPENDENT FILTERING MECHANISMS
When transferring information between different security domains, implement content
filtering solutions that provide redundant and independent filtering mechanisms for each
data type.
Discussion: Content filtering is the process of inspecting information as it traverses a crossdomain solution and determines if the information meets a predefined policy. Redundant
and independent content filtering eliminates a single point of failure filtering system.
Independence is defined as the implementation of a content filter that uses a different code
base and supporting libraries (e.g., two JPEG filters using different vendors’ JPEG libraries)
and multiple, independent system processes.
INFORMATION FLOW ENFORCEMENT | LINEAR FILTER PIPELINES
When transferring information between different security domains, implement a linear
content filter pipeline that is enforced with discretionary and mandatory access controls.
Discussion: Content filtering is the process of inspecting information as it traverses a crossdomain solution and determines if the information meets a predefined policy. The use of
linear content filter pipelines ensures that filter processes are non-bypassable and always
invoked. In general, the use of parallel filtering architectures for content filtering of a single
data type introduces bypass and non-invocation issues.
INFORMATION FLOW ENFORCEMENT | FILTER ORCHESTRATION ENGINES
When transferring information between different security domains, employ content filter
orchestration engines to ensure that:
(a) Content filtering mechanisms successfully complete execution without errors; and
(b) Content filtering actions occur in the correct order and comply with [Assignment:
organization-defined policy].
Discussion: Content filtering is the process of inspecting information as it traverses a crossdomain solution and determines if the information meets a predefined security policy. An
orchestration engine coordinates the sequencing of activities (manual and automated) in a
content filtering process. Errors are defined as either anomalous actions or unexpected
termination of the content filter process. This is not the same as a filter failing content due
to non-compliance with policy. Content filter reports are a commonly used mechanism to
ensure that expected filtering actions are completed successfully.
INFORMATION FLOW ENFORCEMENT | FILTER MECHANISMS USING MULTIPLE PROCESSES
When transferring information between different security domains, implement content
filtering mechanisms using multiple processes.
Discussion: The use of multiple processes to implement content filtering mechanisms
reduces the likelihood of a single point of failure.
INFORMATION FLOW ENFORCEMENT | FAILED CONTENT TRANSFER PREVENTION
When transferring information between different security domains, prevent the transfer
of failed content to the receiving domain.
Discussion: Content that failed filtering checks can corrupt the system if transferred to the
receiving domain.
INFORMATION FLOW ENFORCEMENT | PROCESS REQUIREMENTS FOR INFORMATION TRANSFER
When transferring information between different security domains, the process that
transfers information between filter pipelines:
(a) Does not filter message content;
(b) Validates filtering metadata;
(c) Ensures the content associated with the filtering metadata has successfully completed
filtering; and
(d) Transfers the content to the destination filter pipeline.
Discussion: The processes transferring information between filter pipelines have minimum
complexity and functionality to provide assurance that the processes operate correctly.
SEPARATION OF DUTIES
Control:
a. Identify and document [Assignment: organization-defined duties of individuals requiring
separation]; and
b. Define system access authorizations to support separation of duties.
Discussion: Separation of duties addresses the potential for abuse of authorized privileges and
helps to reduce the risk of malevolent activity without collusion. Separation of duties includes
dividing mission or business functions and support functions among different individuals or roles,
conducting system support functions with different individuals, and ensuring that security
personnel who administer access control functions do not also administer audit functions.
Because separation of duty violations can span systems and application domains, organizations
consider the entirety of systems and system components when developing policy on separation
of duties. Separation of duties is enforced through the account management activities in AC-2,
access control mechanisms in AC-3, and identity management activities in IA-2, IA-4, and IA-12.
LEAST PRIVILEGE
Control: Employ the principle of least privilege, allowing only authorized accesses for users (or
processes acting on behalf of users) that are necessary to accomplish assigned organizational
tasks.
Discussion: Organizations employ least privilege for specific duties and systems. The principle of
least privilege is also applied to system processes, ensuring that the processes have access to
systems and operate at privilege levels no higher than necessary to accomplish organizational
missions or business functions. Organizations consider the creation of additional processes, roles,
and accounts as necessary to achieve least privilege. Organizations apply least privilege to the
development, implementation, and operation of organizational systems.
LEAST PRIVILEGE | AUTHORIZE ACCESS TO SECURITY FUNCTIONS
Authorize access for [Assignment: organization-defined individuals or roles] to:
(a) [Assignment: organization-defined security functions (deployed in hardware, software,
and firmware)]; and
(b) [Assignment: organization-defined security-relevant information].
Discussion: Security functions include establishing system accounts, configuring access
authorizations (i.e., permissions, privileges), configuring settings for events to be audited,
and establishing intrusion detection parameters. Security-relevant information includes
filtering rules for routers or firewalls, configuration parameters for security services,
cryptographic key management information, and access control lists. Authorized personnel
include security administrators, system administrators, system security officers, system
programmers, and other privileged users
LEAST PRIVILEGE | NON-PRIVILEGED ACCESS FOR NONSECURITY FUNCTIONS
Require that users of system accounts (or roles) with access to [Assignment: organizationdefined security functions or security-relevant information] use non-privileged accounts or
roles, when accessing nonsecurity functions.
Discussion: Requiring the use of non-privileged accounts when accessing nonsecurity
functions limits exposure when operating from within privileged accounts or roles. The
inclusion of roles addresses situations where organizations implement access control
policies, such as role-based access control, and where a change of role provides the same
degree of assurance in the change of access authorizations for the user and the processes
acting on behalf of the user as would be provided by a change between a privileged and nonprivileged account.
LEAST PRIVILEGE | NETWORK ACCESS TO PRIVILEGED COMMANDS
Authorize network access to [Assignment: organization-defined privileged commands]
only for [Assignment: organization-defined compelling operational needs] and document
the rationale for such access in the security plan for the system.
Discussion: Network access is any access across a network connection in lieu of local access
(i.e., user being physically present at the device).
LEAST PRIVILEGE | SEPARATE PROCESSING DOMAINS
Provide separate processing domains to enable finer-grained allocation of user privileges.
Discussion: Providing separate processing domains for finer-grained allocation of user
privileges includes using virtualization techniques to permit additional user privileges within
a virtual machine while restricting privileges to other virtual machines or to the underlying
physical machine, implementing separate physical domains, and employing hardware or
software domain separation mechanisms
LEAST PRIVILEGE | PRIVILEGED ACCOUNTS
Restrict privileged accounts on the system to [Assignment: organization-defined personnel
or roles].
Discussion: Privileged accounts, including super user accounts, are typically described as
system administrator for various types of commercial off-the-shelf operating systems.
Restricting privileged accounts to specific personnel or roles prevents day-to-day users from
accessing privileged information or privileged functions. Organizations may differentiate in
the application of restricting privileged accounts between allowed privileges for local
accounts and for domain accounts provided that they retain the ability to control system
configurations for key parameters and as otherwise necessary to sufficiently mitigate risk.
LEAST PRIVILEGE | PRIVILEGED ACCESS BY NON-ORGANIZATIONAL USERS
Prohibit privileged access to the system by non-organizational users.
Discussion: An organizational user is an employee or an individual considered by the
organization to have the equivalent status of an employee. Organizational users include
contractors, guest researchers, or individuals detailed from other organizations. A nonorganizational user is a user who is not an organizational user. Policies and procedures for
granting equivalent status of employees to individuals include a need-to-know, citizenship,
and the relationship to the organization
LEAST PRIVILEGE | REVIEW OF USER PRIVILEGES
(a) Review [Assignment: organization-defined frequency] the privileges assigned to
[Assignment: organization-defined roles or classes of users] to validate the need for
such privileges; and
(b) Reassign or remove privileges, if necessary, to correctly reflect organizational mission
and business needs.
Discussion: The need for certain assigned user privileges may change over time to reflect
changes in organizational mission and business functions, environments of operation,
technologies, or threats. A periodic review of assigned user privileges is necessary to
determine if the rationale for assigning such privileges remains valid. If the need cannot be
revalidated, organizations take appropriate corrective actions
LEAST PRIVILEGE | PRIVILEGE LEVELS FOR CODE EXECUTION
Prevent the following software from executing at higher privilege levels than users
executing the software: [Assignment: organization-defined software].
Discussion: In certain situations, software applications or programs need to execute with
elevated privileges to perform required functions. However, depending on the software
functionality and configuration, if the privileges required for execution are at a higher level
than the privileges assigned to organizational users invoking such applications or programs,
those users may indirectly be provided with greater privileges than assigned
LEAST PRIVILEGE | LOG USE OF PRIVILEGED FUNCTIONS
Log the execution of privileged functions.
Discussion: The misuse of privileged functions, either intentionally or unintentionally by
authorized users or by unauthorized external entities that have compromised system
accounts, is a serious and ongoing concern and can have significant adverse impacts on
organizations. Logging and analyzing the use of privileged functions is one way to detect
such misuse and, in doing so, help mitigate the risk from insider threats and the advanced
persistent threat
) LEAST PRIVILEGE | PROHIBIT NON-PRIVILEGED USERS FROM EXECUTING PRIVILEGED FUNCTIONS
Prevent non-privileged users from executing privileged functions.
Discussion: Privileged functions include disabling, circumventing, or altering implemented
security or privacy controls, establishing system accounts, performing system integrity
checks, and administering cryptographic key management activities. Non-privileged users
are individuals who do not possess appropriate authorizations. Privileged functions that
require protection from non-privileged users include circumventing intrusion detection and
prevention mechanisms or malicious code protection mechanisms. Preventing nonprivileged users from executing privileged functions is enforced by AC-3.
INFORMATION LEAKAGE
Control: Protect the system from information leakage due to electromagnetic signals
emanations.
Discussion: Information leakage is the intentional or unintentional release of data or information
to an untrusted environment from electromagnetic signals emanations. The security categories
or classifications of systems (with respect to confidentiality), organizational security policies, and
risk tolerance guide the selection of controls employed to protect systems against information
leakage due to electromagnetic signals emanations.
INFORMATION LEAKAGE | NATIONAL EMISSIONS POLICIES AND PROCEDURES
Protect system components, associated data communications, and networks in accordance
with national Emissions Security policies and procedures based on the security category or
classification of the information.
Discussion: Emissions Security (EMSEC) policies include the former TEMPEST policies.
PERSONNEL SCREENING
Control:
a. Screen individuals prior to authorizing access to the system; and
b. Rescreen individuals in accordance with [Assignment: organization-defined conditions
requiring rescreening and, where rescreening is so indicated, the frequency of rescreening].
Discussion: Personnel screening and rescreening activities reflect applicable laws, executive
orders, directives, regulations, policies, standards, guidelines, and specific criteria established for
the risk designations of assigned positions. Examples of personnel screening include background
investigations and agency checks. Organizations may define different rescreening conditions and
frequencies for personnel accessing systems based on types of information processed, stored, or
transmitted by the systems.
PERSONNEL SCREENING | CLASSIFIED INFORMATION
Verify that individuals accessing a system processing, storing, or transmitting classified
information are cleared and indoctrinated to the highest classification level of the
information to which they have access on the system.
Discussion: Classified information is the most sensitive information that the Federal
Government processes, stores, or transmits. It is imperative that individuals have the
requisite security clearances and system access authorizations prior to gaining access to such
information. Access authorizations are enforced by system access controls (see AC-3) and
flow controls (see AC-4).
PERSONNEL SCREENING | FORMAL INDOCTRINATION
Verify that individuals accessing a system processing, storing, or transmitting types of
classified information that require formal indoctrination, are formally indoctrinated for all
the relevant types of information to which they have access on the system.
Discussion: Types of classified information that require formal indoctrination include Special
Access Program (SAP), Restricted Data (RD), and Sensitive Compartmented Information (SCI).
PERSONNEL SCREENING | INFORMATION REQUIRING SPECIAL PROTECTIVE MEASURES
Verify that individuals accessing a system processing, storing, or transmitting information
requiring special protection:
(a) Have valid access authorizations that are demonstrated by assigned official
government duties; and
(b) Satisfy [Assignment: organization-defined additional personnel screening criteria].
Discussion: Organizational information that requires special protection includes controlled
unclassified information. Personnel security criteria include position sensitivity background
screening requirements.
PERSONNEL SCREENING | CITIZENSHIP REQUIREMENTS
Verify that individuals accessing a system processing, storing, or transmitting [Assignment:
organization-defined information types] meet [Assignment: organization-defined
citizenship requirements]
ACCESS AGREEMENTS
Control:
a. Develop and document access agreements for organizational systems;
b. Review and update the access agreements [Assignment: organization-defined frequency];
and
c. Verify that individuals requiring access to organizational information and systems:
1. Sign appropriate access agreements prior to being granted access; and
2. Re-sign access agreements to maintain access to organizational systems when access
agreements have been updated or [Assignment: organization-defined frequency].
Discussion: Access agreements include nondisclosure agreements, acceptable use agreements,
rules of behavior, and conflict-of-interest agreements. Signed access agreements include an
acknowledgement that individuals have read, understand, and agree to abide by the constraints
associated with organizational systems to which access is authorized. Organizations can use
electronic signatures to acknowledge access agreements unless specifically prohibited by
organizational policy.
ACCESS AGREEMENTS | CLASSIFIED INFORMATION REQUIRING SPECIAL PROTECTION
Verify that access to classified information requiring special protection is granted only to
individuals who:
(a) Have a valid access authorization that is demonstrated by assigned official
government duties;
(b) Satisfy associated personnel security criteria; and
(c) Have read, understood, and signed a nondisclosure agreement.
Discussion: Classified information that requires special protection includes collateral
information, Special Access Program (SAP) information, and Sensitive Compartmented
Information (SCI). Personnel security criteria reflect applicable laws, executive orders,
directives, regulations, policies, standards, and guidelines.
ACCESS AGREEMENTS | POST-EMPLOYMENT REQUIREMENTS
(a) Notify individuals of applicable, legally binding post-employment requirements for
protection of organizational information; and
Require individuals to sign an acknowledgment of these requirements, if applicable, as
part of granting initial access to covered information.
Discussion: Organizations consult with the Office of the General Counsel regarding matters
of post-employment requirements on terminated individuals.
BOUNDARY PROTECTION
Control:
a. Monitor and control communications at the external managed interfaces to the system and
at key internal managed interfaces within the system;
b. Implement subnetworks for publicly accessible system components that are [Selection:
physically; logically] separated from internal organizational networks; and
c. Connect to external networks or systems only through managed interfaces consisting of
boundary protection devices arranged in accordance with an organizational security and
privacy architecture.
Discussion: Managed interfaces include gateways, routers, firewalls, guards, network-based
malicious code analysis, virtualization systems, or encrypted tunnels implemented within a
security architecture. Subnetworks that are physically or logically separated from internal
networks are referred to as demilitarized zones or DMZs. Restricting or prohibiting interfaces
within organizational systems includes restricting external web traffic to designated web servers
within managed interfaces, prohibiting external traffic that appears to be spoofing internal
addresses, and prohibiting internal traffic that appears to be spoofing external addresses. [SP
800-189] provides additional information on source address validation techniques to prevent
ingress and egress of traffic with spoofed addresses. Commercial telecommunications services
are provided by network components and consolidated management systems shared by
customers. These services may also include third party-provided access lines and other service
elements. Such services may represent sources of increased risk despite contract security
provisions. Boundary protection may be implemented as a common control for all or part of an
organizational network such that the boundary to be protected is greater than a system-specific
boundary (i.e., an authorization boundary).
BOUNDARY PROTECTION | ACCESS POINTS
Limit the number of external network connections to the system.
Discussion: Limiting the number of external network connections facilitates monitoring of
inbound and outbound communications traffic. The Trusted Internet Connection [DHS TIC]
initiative is an example of a federal guideline that requires limits on the number of external
network connections. Limiting the number of external network connections to the system is
important during transition periods from older to newer technologies (e.g., transitioning
from IPv4 to IPv6 network protocols). Such transitions may require implementing the older
and newer technologies simultaneously during the transition period and thus increase the
number of access points to the system
BOUNDARY PROTECTION | EXTERNAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES
(a) Implement a managed interface for each external telecommunication service;
(b) Establish a traffic flow policy for each managed interface;
(c) Protect the confidentiality and integrity of the information being transmitted across
each interface;
(d) Document each exception to the traffic flow policy with a supporting mission or
business need and duration of that need;
(e) Review exceptions to the traffic flow policy [Assignment: organization-defined
frequency] and remove exceptions that are no longer supported by an explicit mission
or business need;
(f) Prevent unauthorized exchange of control plane traffic with external networks;
(g) Publish information to enable remote networks to detect unauthorized control plane
traffic from internal networks; and
(h) Filter unauthorized control plane traffic from external networks.
Discussion: External telecommunications services can provide data and/or voice
communications services. Examples of control plane traffic include Border Gateway Protocol
(BGP) routing, Domain Name System (DNS), and management protocols. See [SP 800-189]
for additional information on the use of the resource public key infrastructure (RPKI) to
protect BGP routes and detect unauthorized BGP announcements.
BOUNDARY PROTECTION | DENY BY DEFAULT — ALLOW BY EXCEPTION
Deny network communications traffic by default and allow network communications
traffic by exception [Selection (one or more): at managed interfaces; for [Assignment:
organization-defined systems]].
Discussion: Denying by default and allowing by exception applies to inbound and outbound
network communications traffic. A deny-all, permit-by-exception network communications
traffic policy ensures that only those system connections that are essential and approved are
allowed. Deny by default, allow by exception also applies to a system that is connected to an
external system
BOUNDARY PROTECTION | SPLIT TUNNELING FOR REMOTE DEVICES
Prevent split tunneling for remote devices connecting to organizational systems unless the
split tunnel is securely provisioned using [Assignment: organization-defined safeguards].
Discussion: Split tunneling is the process of allowing a remote user or device to establish a
non-remote connection with a system and simultaneously communicate via some other
connection to a resource in an external network. This method of network access enables a
user to access remote devices and simultaneously, access uncontrolled networks. Split
tunneling might be desirable by remote users to communicate with local system resources,
such as printers or file servers. However, split tunneling can facilitate unauthorized external
connections, making the system vulnerable to attack and to exfiltration of organizational
information. Split tunneling can be prevented by disabling configuration settings that allow
such capability in remote devices and by preventing those configuration settings from being
configurable by users. Prevention can also be achieved by the detection of split tunneling (or
of configuration settings that allow split tunneling) in the remote device, and by prohibiting
the connection if the remote device is using split tunneling. A virtual private network (VPN)
can be used to securely provision a split tunnel. A securely provisioned VPN includes locking
connectivity to exclusive, managed, and named environments, or to a specific set of preapproved addresses, without user control
BOUNDARY PROTECTION | ROUTE TRAFFIC TO AUTHENTICATED PROXY SERVERS
Route [Assignment: organization-defined internal communications traffic] to [Assignment:
organization-defined external networks] through authenticated proxy servers at managed
interfaces.
Discussion: External networks are networks outside of organizational control. A proxy server
is a server (i.e., system or application) that acts as an intermediary for clients requesting
system resources from non-organizational or other organizational servers. System resources
that may be requested include files, connections, web pages, or services. Client requests
established through a connection to a proxy server are assessed to manage complexity and
provide additional protection by limiting direct connectivity. Web content filtering devices
are one of the most common proxy servers that provide access to the Internet. Proxy servers
can support the logging of Transmission Control Protocol sessions and the blocking of
specific Uniform Resource Locators, Internet Protocol addresses, and domain names. Web
proxies can be configured with organization-defined lists of authorized and unauthorized
websites. Note that proxy servers may inhibit the use of virtual private networks (VPNs) and
create the potential for “man-in-the-middle” attacks (depending on the implementation).
BOUNDARY PROTECTION | RESTRICT THREATENING OUTGOING COMMUNICATIONS TRAFFIC
(a) Detect and deny outgoing communications traffic posing a threat to external systems;
and
(b) Audit the identity of internal users associated with denied communications.
Discussion: Detecting outgoing communications traffic from internal actions that may pose
threats to external systems is known as extrusion detection. Extrusion detection is carried
out within the system at managed interfaces. Extrusion detection includes the analysis of
incoming and outgoing communications traffic while searching for indications of internal
threats to the security of external systems. Internal threats to external systems include
traffic indicative of denial-of-service attacks, traffic with spoofed source addresses, and
traffic that contains malicious code. Organizations have criteria to determine, update, and
manage identified threats related to extrusion detection
BOUNDARY PROTECTION | PREVENT EXFILTRATION
(a) Prevent the exfiltration of information; and
(b) Conduct exfiltration tests [Assignment: organization-defined frequency].
Discussion: Prevention of exfiltration applies to both the intentional and unintentional
exfiltration of information. Techniques used to prevent the exfiltration of information from
systems may be implemented at internal endpoints, external boundaries, and across
managed interfaces and include adherence to protocol formats, monitoring for beaconing
activity from systems, disconnecting external network interfaces except when explicitly
needed, employing traffic profile analysis to detect deviations from the volume and types of
traffic expected, call backs to command and control centers, conducting penetration testing,
monitoring for steganography, disassembling and reassembling packet headers, and using
data loss and data leakage prevention tools. Devices that enforce strict adherence to
protocol formats include deep packet inspection firewalls and Extensible Markup Language
(XML) gateways. The devices verify adherence to protocol formats and specifications at the
application layer and identify vulnerabilities that cannot be detected by devices that operate
at the network or transport layers. The prevention of exfiltration is similar to data loss
prevention or data leakage prevention and is closely associated with cross-domain solutions
and system guards that enforce information flow requirements.
BOUNDARY PROTECTION | RESTRICT INCOMING COMMUNICATIONS TRAFFIC
Only allow incoming communications from [Assignment: organization-defined authorized
sources] to be routed to [Assignment: organization-defined authorized destinations].
Discussion: General source address validation techniques are applied to restrict the use of
illegal and unallocated source addresses as well as source addresses that should only be
used within the system. The restriction of incoming communications traffic provides
determinations that source and destination address pairs represent authorized or allowed
communications. Determinations can be based on several factors, including the presence of
such address pairs in the lists of authorized or allowed communications, the absence of such
address pairs in lists of unauthorized or disallowed pairs, or meeting more general rules for
authorized or allowed source and destination pairs. Strong authentication of network
addresses is not possible without the use of explicit security protocols, and thus, addresses
can often be spoofed. Further, identity-based incoming traffic restriction methods can be
employed, including router access control lists and firewall rules.
BOUNDARY PROTECTION | HOST-BASED PROTECTION
Implement [Assignment: organization-defined host-based boundary protection
mechanisms] at [Assignment: organization-defined system components].
Discussion: Host-based boundary protection mechanisms include host-based firewalls.
System components that employ host-based boundary protection mechanisms include
servers, workstations, notebook computers, and mobile devices.
BOUNDARY PROTECTION | ISOLATION OF SECURITY TOOLS, MECHANISMS, AND SUPPORT
COMPONENTS
Isolate [Assignment: organization-defined information security tools, mechanisms, and
support components] from other internal system components by implementing physically
separate subnetworks with managed interfaces to other components of the system.
Discussion: Physically separate subnetworks with managed interfaces are useful in isolating
computer network defenses from critical operational processing networks to prevent
adversaries from discovering the analysis and forensics techniques employed by
organizations.
BOUNDARY PROTECTION | PROTECT AGAINST UNAUTHORIZED PHYSICAL CONNECTIONS
Protect against unauthorized physical connections at [Assignment: organization-defined
managed interfaces].
Discussion: Systems that operate at different security categories or classification levels may
share common physical and environmental controls, since the systems may share space
within the same facilities. In practice, it is possible that these separate systems may share
common equipment rooms, wiring closets, and cable distribution paths. Protection against
unauthorized physical connections can be achieved by using clearly identified and physically
separated cable trays, connection frames, and patch panels for each side of managed
interfaces with physical access controls that enforce limited authorized access to these
items.
BOUNDARY PROTECTION | NETWORKED PRIVILEGED ACCESSES
Route networked, privileged accesses through a dedicated, managed interface for
purposes of access control and auditing.
Discussion: Privileged access provides greater accessibility to system functions, including
security functions. Adversaries attempt to gain privileged access to systems through remote
access to cause adverse mission or business impacts, such as by exfiltrating information or
bringing down a critical system capability. Routing networked, privileged access requests
through a dedicated, managed interface further restricts privileged access for increased
access control and auditing
BOUNDARY PROTECTION | PREVENT DISCOVERY OF SYSTEM COMPONENTS
Prevent the discovery of specific system components that represent a managed interface.
Discussion: Preventing the discovery of system components representing a managed
interface helps protect network addresses of those components from discovery through
common tools and techniques used to identify devices on networks. Network addresses are
not available for discovery and require prior knowledge for access. Preventing the discovery
of components and devices can be accomplished by not publishing network addresses, using
network address translation, or not entering the addresses in domain name systems.
Another prevention technique is to periodically change network addresses.
BOUNDARY PROTECTION | AUTOMATED ENFORCEMENT OF PROTOCOL FORMATS
Enforce adherence to protocol formats.
Discussion: System components that enforce protocol formats include deep packet
inspection firewalls and XML gateways. The components verify adherence to protocol
formats and specifications at the application layer and identify vulnerabilities that cannot be
detected by devices operating at the network or transport layers.
BOUNDARY PROTECTION | FAIL SECURE
Prevent systems from entering unsecure states in the event of an operational failure of a
boundary protection device.
Discussion: Fail secure is a condition achieved by employing mechanisms to ensure that in
the event of operational failures of boundary protection devices at managed interfaces,
systems do not enter into unsecure states where intended security properties no longer
hold. Managed interfaces include routers, firewalls, and application gateways that reside on
protected subnetworks (commonly referred to as demilitarized zones). Failures of boundary
protection devices cannot lead to or cause information external to the devices to enter the
devices nor can failures permit unauthorized information releases.
BOUNDARY PROTECTION | BLOCK COMMUNICATION FROM NON-ORGANIZATIONALLY CONFIGURED
HOSTS
Block inbound and outbound communications traffic between [Assignment: organizationdefined communication clients] that are independently configured by end users and
external service providers.
Discussion: Communication clients independently configured by end users and external
service providers include instant messaging clients and video conferencing software and
applications. Traffic blocking does not apply to communication clients that are configured by
organizations to perform authorized functions.
BOUNDARY PROTECTION | DYNAMIC ISOLATION AND SEGREGATION
Provide the capability to dynamically isolate [Assignment: organization-defined system
components] from other system components.
Discussion: The capability to dynamically isolate certain internal system components is
useful when it is necessary to partition or separate system components of questionable
origin from components that possess greater trustworthiness. Component isolation reduces
the attack surface of organizational systems. Isolating selected system components can also
limit the damage from successful attacks when such attacks occur.
BOUNDARY PROTECTION | ISOLATION OF SYSTEM COMPONENTS
Employ boundary protection mechanisms to isolate [Assignment: organization-defined
system components] supporting [Assignment: organization-defined missions and/or
business functions].
Discussion: Organizations can isolate system components that perform different mission or
business functions. Such isolation limits unauthorized information flows among system
components and provides the opportunity to deploy greater levels of protection for selected
system components. Isolating system components with boundary protection mechanisms
provides the capability for increased protection of individual system components and to
more effectively control information flows between those components. Isolating system
components provides enhanced protection that limits the potential harm from hostile cyberattacks and errors. The degree of isolation varies depending upon the mechanisms chosen.
Boundary protection mechanisms include routers, gateways, and firewalls that separate
system components into physically separate networks or subnetworks; cross-domain devices
that separate subnetworks; virtualization techniques; and the encryption of information
flows among system components using distinct encryption keys.
BOUNDARY PROTECTION | SEPARATE SUBNETS FOR CONNECTING TO DIFFERENT SECURITY DOMAINS
Implement separate network addresses to connect to systems in different security
domains.
Discussion: The decomposition of systems into subnetworks (i.e., subnets) helps to provide
the appropriate level of protection for network connections to different security domains
that contain information with different security categories or classification levels.
BOUNDARY PROTECTION | DISABLE SENDER FEEDBACK ON PROTOCOL VALIDATION FAILURE
Disable feedback to senders on protocol format validation failure.
Discussion: Disabling feedback to senders when there is a failure in protocol validation
format prevents adversaries from obtaining information that would otherwise be
unavailable.
BOUNDARY PROTECTION | PERSONALLY IDENTIFIABLE INFORMATION
For systems that process personally identifiable information:
(a) Apply the following processing rules to data elements of personally identifiable
information: [Assignment: organization-defined processing rules];
(b) Monitor for permitted processing at the external interfaces to the system and at key
internal boundaries within the system;
(c) Document each processing exception; and
(d) Review and remove exceptions that are no longer supported.
Discussion: Managing the processing of personally identifiable information is an important
aspect of protecting an individual’s privacy. Applying, monitoring for, and documenting
exceptions to processing rules ensure that personally identifiable information is processed
only in accordance with established privacy requirements.
BOUNDARY PROTECTION | UNCLASSIFIED NATIONAL SECURITY SYSTEM CONNECTIONS
Prohibit the direct connection of [Assignment: organization-defined unclassified national
security system] to an external network without the use of [Assignment: organizationdefined boundary protection device].
Discussion: A direct connection is a dedicated physical or virtual connection between two or
more systems. Organizations typically do not have complete control over external networks,
including the Internet. Boundary protection devices (e.g., firewalls, gateways, and routers)
mediate communications and information flows between unclassified national security
systems and external networks.
BOUNDARY PROTECTION | CLASSIFIED NATIONAL SECURITY SYSTEM CONNECTIONS
Prohibit the direct connection of a classified national security system to an external
network without the use of [Assignment: organization-defined boundary protection
device].
Discussion: A direct connection is a dedicated physical or virtual connection between two or
more systems. Organizations typically do not have complete control over external networks,
including the Internet. Boundary protection devices (e.g., firewalls, gateways, and routers)
mediate communications and information flows between classified national security systems
and external networks. In addition, approved boundary protection devices (typically
managed interface or cross-domain systems) provide information flow enforcement from
systems to external networks
BOUNDARY PROTECTION | UNCLASSIFIED NON-NATIONAL SECURITY SYSTEM CONNECTIONS
Prohibit the direct connection of [Assignment: organization-defined unclassified nonnational security system] to an external network without the use of [Assignment:
organization-defined boundary protection device].
Discussion: A direct connection is a dedicated physical or virtual connection between two or
more systems. Organizations typically do not have complete control over external networks,
including the Internet. Boundary protection devices (e.g., firewalls, gateways, and routers)
mediate communications and information flows between unclassified non-national security
systems and external networks.
BOUNDARY PROTECTION | CONNECTIONS TO PUBLIC NETWORKS
Prohibit the direct connection of [Assignment: organization-defined system] to a public
network.
Discussion: A direct connection is a dedicated physical or virtual connection between two or
more systems. A public network is a network accessible to the public, including the Internet
and organizational extranets with public access.
) BOUNDARY PROTECTION | SEPARATE SUBNETS TO ISOLATE FUNCTIONS
Implement [Selection: physically; logically] separate subnetworks to isolate the following
critical system components and functions: [Assignment: organization-defined critical
system components and functions].
Discussion: Separating critical system components and functions from other noncritical
system components and functions through separate subnetworks may be necessary to
reduce susceptibility to a catastrophic or debilitating breach or compromise that results in
system failure. For example, physically separating the command and control function from
the in-flight entertainment function through separate subnetworks in a commercial aircraft
provides an increased level of assurance in the trustworthiness of critical system functions.
TRANSMISSION CONFIDENTIALITY AND INTEGRITY
Control: Protect the [Selection (one or more): confidentiality; integrity] of transmitted
information.
Discussion: Protecting the confidentiality and integrity of transmitted information applies to
internal and external networks as well as any system components that can transmit information,
including servers, notebook computers, desktop computers, mobile devices, printers, copiers,
scanners, facsimile machines, and radios. Unprotected communication paths are exposed to the
possibility of interception and modification. Protecting the confidentiality and integrity of
information can be accomplished by physical or logical means. Physical protection can be
achieved by using protected distribution systems. A protected distribution system is a wireline or
fiber-optics telecommunications system that includes terminals and adequate electromagnetic,
acoustical, electrical, and physical controls to permit its use for the unencrypted transmission of
classified information. Logical protection can be achieved by employing encryption techniques.
Organizations that rely on commercial providers who offer transmission services as commodity
services rather than as fully dedicated services may find it difficult to obtain the necessary
assurances regarding the implementation of needed controls for transmission confidentiality and
integrity. In such situations, organizations determine what types of confidentiality or integrity
services are available in standard, commercial telecommunications service packages. If it is not
feasible to obtain the necessary controls and assurances of control effectiveness through
appropriate contracting vehicles, organizations can implement appropriate compensating
controls.
TRANSMISSION CONFIDENTIALITY AND INTEGRITY | CRYPTOGRAPHIC PROTECTION
Implement cryptographic mechanisms to [Selection (one or more): prevent unauthorized
disclosure of information; detect changes to information] during transmission.
Discussion: Encryption protects information from unauthorized disclosure and modification
during transmission. Cryptographic mechanisms that protect the confidentiality and integrity
of information during transmission include TLS and IPSec. Cryptographic mechanisms used to
protect information integrity include cryptographic hash functions that have applications in
digital signatures, checksums, and message authentication codes.
TRANSMISSION CONFIDENTIALITY AND INTEGRITY | PRE- AND POST-TRANSMISSION HANDLING
Maintain the [Selection (one or more): confidentiality; integrity] of information during
preparation for transmission and during reception.
Discussion: Information can be unintentionally or maliciously disclosed or modified during
preparation for transmission or during reception, including during aggregation, at protocol
transformation points, and during packing and unpacking. Such unauthorized disclosures or
modifications compromise the confidentiality or integrity of the information.
TRANSMISSION CONFIDENTIALITY AND INTEGRITY | CRYPTOGRAPHIC PROTECTION FOR MESSAGE
EXTERNALS
Implement cryptographic mechanisms to protect message externals unless otherwise
protected by [Assignment: organization-defined alternative physical controls].
Discussion: Cryptographic protection for message externals addresses protection from the
unauthorized disclosure of information. Message externals include message headers and
routing information. Cryptographic protection prevents the exploitation of message
externals and applies to internal and external networks or links that may be visible to
individuals who are not authorized users. Header and routing information is sometimes
transmitted in clear text (i.e., unencrypted) because the information is not identified by
organizations as having significant value or because encrypting the information can result in
lower network performance or higher costs. Alternative physical controls include protected
distribution systems.
TRANSMISSION CONFIDENTIALITY AND INTEGRITY | CONCEAL OR RANDOMIZE COMMUNICATIONS
Implement cryptographic mechanisms to conceal or randomize communication patterns
unless otherwise protected by [Assignment: organization-defined alternative physical
controls].
Discussion: Concealing or randomizing communication patterns addresses protection from
unauthorized disclosure of information. Communication patterns include frequency, periods,
predictability, and amount. Changes to communications patterns can reveal information
with intelligence value, especially when combined with other available information related
to the mission and business functions of the organization. Concealing or randomizing
communications prevents the derivation of intelligence based on communications patterns
and applies to both internal and external networks or links that may be visible to individuals
who are not authorized users. Encrypting the links and transmitting in continuous, fixed, or
random patterns prevents the derivation of intelligence from the system communications
patterns. Alternative physical controls include protected distribution systems.
TRANSMISSION CONFIDENTIALITY AND INTEGRITY | PROTECTED DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM
Implement [Assignment: organization-defined protected distribution system] to [Selection
(one or more): prevent unauthorized disclosure of information; detect changes to
information] during transmission.
Discussion: The purpose of a protected distribution system is to deter, detect, and/or make
difficult physical access to the communication lines that carry national security information.
CRYPTOGRAPHIC PROTECTION
Control:
a. Determine the [Assignment: organization-defined cryptographic uses]; and
Implement the following types of cryptography required for each specified cryptographic
use: [Assignment: organization-defined types of cryptography for each specified
cryptographic use].
Discussion: Cryptography can be employed to support a variety of security solutions, including
the protection of classified information and controlled unclassified information, the provision
and implementation of digital signatures, and the enforcement of information separation when
authorized individuals have the necessary clearances but lack the necessary formal access
approvals. Cryptography can also be used to support random number and hash generation.
Generally applicable cryptographic standards include FIPS-validated cryptography and NSAapproved cryptography. For example, organizations that need to protect classified information
may specify the use of NSA-approved cryptography. Organizations that need to provision and
implement digital signatures may specify the use of FIPS-validated cryptography. Cryptography is
implemented in accordance with applicable laws, executive orders, directives, regulations,
policies, standards, and guidelines
COVERT CHANNEL ANALYSIS
Control:
Perform a covert channel analysis to identify those aspects of communications within the
system that are potential avenues for covert [Selection (one or more): storage; timing]
channels; and
b. Estimate the maximum bandwidth of those channels.
Discussion: Developers are in the best position to identify potential areas within systems that
might lead to covert channels. Covert channel analysis is a meaningful activity when there is the
potential for unauthorized information flows across security domains, such as in the case of
systems that contain export-controlled information and have connections to external networks
(i.e., networks that are not controlled by organizations). Covert channel analysis is also useful for
multilevel secure systems, multiple security level systems, and cross-domain systems.
COVERT CHANNEL ANALYSIS | TEST COVERT CHANNELS FOR EXPLOITABILITY
Test a subset of the identified covert channels to determine the channels that are
exploitable
COVERT CHANNEL ANALYSIS | MAXIMUM BANDWIDTH
Reduce the maximum bandwidth for identified covert [Selection (one or more): storage;
timing] channels to [Assignment: organization-defined values].
Discussion: The complete elimination of covert channels, especially covert timing channels,
is usually not possible without significant performance impacts.
COVERT CHANNEL ANALYSIS | MEASURE BANDWIDTH IN OPERATIONAL ENVIRONMENTS
Measure the bandwidth of [Assignment: organization-defined subset of identified covert
channels] in the operational environment of the system.
Discussion: Measuring covert channel bandwidth in specified operational environments
helps organizations determine how much information can be covertly leaked before such
leakage adversely affects mission or business functions. Covert channel bandwidth may be
significantly different when measured in settings that are independent of the specific
environments of operation, including laboratories or system development environments.
SYSTEM MONITORING
Control:
Monitor the system to detect:
1. Attacks and indicators of potential attacks in accordance with the following monitoring
objectives: [Assignment: organization-defined monitoring objectives]; and
2. Unauthorized local, network, and remote connections;
b. Identify unauthorized use of the system through the following techniques and methods:
[Assignment: organization-defined techniques and methods];
c. Invoke internal monitoring capabilities or deploy monitoring devices:
1. Strategically within the system to collect organization-determined essential information;
and
2. At ad hoc locations within the system to track specific types of transactions of interest
to the organization;
d. Analyze detected events and anomalies;
e. Adjust the level of system monitoring activity when there is a change in risk to organizational
operations and assets, individuals, other organizations, or the Nation;
f. Obtain legal opinion regarding system monitoring activities; and
g. Provide [Assignment: organization-defined system monitoring information] to [Assignment:
organization-defined personnel or roles] [Selection (one or more): as needed; [Assignment:
organization-defined frequency]].
Discussion: System monitoring includes external and internal monitoring. External monitoring
includes the observation of events occurring at external interfaces to the system. Internal
monitoring includes the observation of events occurring within the system. Organizations
monitor systems by observing audit activities in real time or by observing other system aspects
such as access patterns, characteristics of access, and other actions. The monitoring objectives
guide and inform the determination of the events. System monitoring capabilities are achieved
through a variety of tools and techniques, including intrusion detection and prevention systems,
malicious code protection software, scanning tools, audit record monitoring software, and
network monitoring software.
Depending on the security architecture, the distribution and configuration of monitoring devices
may impact throughput at key internal and external boundaries as well as at other locations
across a network due to the introduction of network throughput latency. If throughput
management is needed, such devices are strategically located and deployed as part of an
established organization-wide security architecture. Strategic locations for monitoring devices
include selected perimeter locations and near key servers and server farms that support critical
applications. Monitoring devices are typically employed at the managed interfaces associated
with controls SC-7 and AC-17. The information collected is a function of the organizational
monitoring objectives and the capability of systems to support such objectives. Specific types of
transactions of interest include Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) traffic that bypasses HTTP
proxies. System monitoring is an integral part of organizational continuous monitoring and
incident response programs, and output from system monitoring serves as input to those
programs. System monitoring requirements, including the need for specific types of system
monitoring, may be referenced in other controls (e.g., AC-2g, AC-2(7), AC-2(12)(a), AC-17(1), AU13, AU-13(1), AU-13(2), CM-3f, CM-6d, MA-3a, MA-4a, SC-5(3)(b), SC-7a, SC-7(24)(b), SC-18b, SC43b). Adjustments to levels of system monitoring are based on law enforcement information,
intelligence information, or other sources of information. The legality of system monitoring
activities is based on applicable laws, executive orders, directives, regulations, policies,
standards, and guidelines.
SYSTEM MONITORING | SYSTEM-WIDE INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM
Connect and configure individual intrusion detection tools into a system-wide intrusion
detection system.
Discussion: Linking individual intrusion detection tools into a system-wide intrusion
detection system provides additional coverage and effective detection capabilities. The
information contained in one intrusion detection tool can be shared widely across the
organization, making the system-wide detection capability more robust and powerful.
SYSTEM MONITORING | AUTOMATED TOOLS AND MECHANISMS FOR REAL-TIME ANALYSIS
Employ automated tools and mechanisms to support near real-time analysis of events.
Discussion: Automated tools and mechanisms include host-based, network-based,
transport-based, or storage-based event monitoring tools and mechanisms or security
information and event management (SIEM) technologies that provide real-time analysis of
alerts and notifications generated by organizational systems. Automated monitoring
techniques can create unintended privacy risks because automated controls may connect to
external or otherwise unrelated systems. The matching of records between these systems
may create linkages with unintended consequences. Organizations assess and document
these risks in their privacy impact assessment and make determinations that are in
alignment with their privacy program plan
SYSTEM MONITORING | AUTOMATED TOOL AND MECHANISM INTEGRATION
Employ automated tools and mechanisms to integrate intrusion detection tools and
mechanisms into access control and flow control mechanisms.
Discussion: Using automated tools and mechanisms to integrate intrusion detection tools
and mechanisms into access and flow control mechanisms facilitates a rapid response to
attacks by enabling the reconfiguration of mechanisms in support of attack isolation and
elimination.
SYSTEM MONITORING | INBOUND AND OUTBOUND COMMUNICATIONS TRAFFIC
(a) Determine criteria for unusual or unauthorized activities or conditions for inbound
and outbound communications traffic;
(b) Monitor inbound and outbound communications traffic [Assignment: organizationdefined frequency] for [Assignment: organization-defined unusual or unauthorized
activities or conditions].
Discussion: Unusual or unauthorized activities or conditions related to system inbound and
outbound communications traffic includes internal traffic that indicates the presence of
malicious code or unauthorized use of legitimate code or credentials within organizational
systems or propagating among system components, signaling to external systems, and the
unauthorized exporting of information. Evidence of malicious code or unauthorized use of
legitimate code or credentials is used to identify potentially compromised systems or system
components
SYSTEM MONITORING | SYSTEM-GENERATED ALERTS
Alert [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles] when the following systemgenerated indications of compromise or potential compromise occur: [Assignment:
organization-defined compromise indicators].
Discussion: Alerts may be generated from a variety of sources, including audit records or
inputs from malicious code protection mechanisms, intrusion detection or prevention
mechanisms, or boundary protection devices such as firewalls, gateways, and routers. Alerts
can be automated and may be transmitted telephonically, by electronic mail messages, or by
text messaging. Organizational personnel on the alert notification list can include system
administrators, mission or business owners, system owners, information owners/stewards,
senior agency information security officers, senior agency officials for privacy, system
security officers, or privacy officers. In contrast to alerts generated by the system, alerts
generated by organizations in SI-4(12) focus on information sources external to the system,
such as suspicious activity reports and reports on potential insider threats.
SYSTEM MONITORING | AUTOMATED RESPONSE TO SUSPICIOUS EVENTS
(a) Notify [Assignment: organization-defined incident response personnel (identified by
name and/or by role)] of detected suspicious events; and
(b) Take the following actions upon detection: [Assignment: organization-defined leastdisruptive actions to terminate suspicious events].
Discussion: Least-disruptive actions include initiating requests for human responses.
SYSTEM MONITORING | TESTING OF MONITORING TOOLS AND MECHANISMS
Test intrusion-monitoring tools and mechanisms [Assignment: organization-defined
frequency].
Discussion: Testing intrusion-monitoring tools and mechanisms is necessary to ensure that
the tools and mechanisms are operating correctly and continue to satisfy the monitoring
objectives of organizations. The frequency and depth of testing depends on the types of
tools and mechanisms used by organizations and the methods of deployment
SYSTEM MONITORING | VISIBILITY OF ENCRYPTED COMMUNICATIONS
Make provisions so that [Assignment: organization-defined encrypted communications
traffic] is visible to [Assignment: organization-defined system monitoring tools and
mechanisms].
Discussion: Organizations balance the need to encrypt communications traffic to protect
data confidentiality with the need to maintain visibility into such traffic from a monitoring
perspective. Organizations determine whether the visibility requirement applies to internal
encrypted traffic, encrypted traffic intended for external destinations, or a subset of the
traffic types.
SYSTEM MONITORING | ANALYZE COMMUNICATIONS TRAFFIC ANOMALIES
Analyze outbound communications traffic at the external interfaces to the system and
selected [Assignment: organization-defined interior points within the system] to discover
anomalies.
Discussion: Organization-defined interior points include subnetworks and subsystems.
Anomalies within organizational systems include large file transfers, long-time persistent
connections, attempts to access information from unexpected locations, the use of unusual
protocols and ports, the use of unmonitored network protocols (e.g., IPv6 usage during IPv4
transition), and attempted communications with suspected malicious external addresses.
SYSTEM MONITORING | AUTOMATED ORGANIZATION-GENERATED ALERTS
Alert [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles] using [Assignment:
organization-defined automated mechanisms] when the following indications of
inappropriate or unusual activities with security or privacy implications occur:
[Assignment: organization-defined activities that trigger alerts].
Discussion: Organizational personnel on the system alert notification list include system
administrators, mission or business owners, system owners, senior agency information
security officer, senior agency official for privacy, system security officers, or privacy officers.
Automated organization-generated alerts are the security alerts generated by organizations
and transmitted using automated means. The sources for organization-generated alerts are
focused on other entities such as suspicious activity reports and reports on potential insider
threats. In contrast to alerts generated by the organization, alerts generated by the system
in SI-4(5) focus on information sources that are internal to the systems, such as audit
records
SYSTEM MONITORING | ANALYZE TRAFFIC AND EVENT PATTERNS
(a) Analyze communications traffic and event patterns for the system;
(b) Develop profiles representing common traffic and event patterns; and
(c) Use the traffic and event profiles in tuning system-monitoring devices.
Discussion: Identifying and understanding common communications traffic and event
patterns help organizations provide useful information to system monitoring devices to
more effectively identify suspicious or anomalous traffic and events when they occur. Such
information can help reduce the number of false positives and false negatives during system
monitoring.
SYSTEM MONITORING | WIRELESS INTRUSION DETECTION
Employ a wireless intrusion detection system to identify rogue wireless devices and to
detect attack attempts and potential compromises or breaches to the system.
Discussion: Wireless signals may radiate beyond organizational facilities. Organizations
proactively search for unauthorized wireless connections, including the conduct of thorough
scans for unauthorized wireless access points. Wireless scans are not limited to those areas
within facilities containing systems but also include areas outside of facilities to verify that
unauthorized wireless access points are not connected to organizational systems.
SYSTEM MONITORING | WIRELESS TO WIRELINE COMMUNICATIONS
Employ an intrusion detection system to monitor wireless communications traffic as the
traffic passes from wireless to wireline networks.
Discussion: Wireless networks are inherently less secure than wired networks. For example,
wireless networks are more susceptible to eavesdroppers or traffic analysis than wireline
networks. When wireless to wireline communications exist, the wireless network could
become a port of entry into the wired network. Given the greater facility of unauthorized
network access via wireless access points compared to unauthorized wired network access
from within the physical boundaries of the system, additional monitoring of transitioning
traffic between wireless and wired networks may be necessary to detect malicious activities.
Employing intrusion detection systems to monitor wireless communications traffic helps to
ensure that the traffic does not contain malicious code prior to transitioning to the wireline
network.
SYSTEM MONITORING | CORRELATE MONITORING INFORMATION
Correlate information from monitoring tools and mechanisms employed throughout the
system.
Discussion: Correlating information from different system monitoring tools and mechanisms
can provide a more comprehensive view of system activity. Correlating system monitoring
tools and mechanisms that typically work in isolation—including malicious code protection
software, host monitoring, and network monitoring—can provide an organization-wide
monitoring view and may reveal otherwise unseen attack patterns. Understanding the
capabilities and limitations of diverse monitoring tools and mechanisms and how to
maximize the use of information generated by those tools and mechanisms can help
organizations develop, operate, and maintain effective monitoring programs. The correlation
of monitoring information is especially important during the transition from older to newer
technologies (e.g., transitioning from IPv4 to IPv6 network protocols).
SYSTEM MONITORING | INTEGRATED SITUATIONAL AWARENESS
Correlate information from monitoring physical, cyber, and supply chain activities to
achieve integrated, organization-wide situational awareness.
Discussion: Correlating monitoring information from a more diverse set of information
sources helps to achieve integrated situational awareness. Integrated situational awareness
from a combination of physical, cyber, and supply chain monitoring activities enhances the
capability of organizations to more quickly detect sophisticated attacks and investigate the
methods and techniques employed to carry out such attacks. In contrast to SI-4(16), which
correlates the various cyber monitoring information, integrated situational awareness is
intended to correlate monitoring beyond the cyber domain. Correlation of monitoring
information from multiple activities may help reveal attacks on organizations that are
operating across multiple attack vectors
SYSTEM MONITORING | ANALYZE TRAFFIC AND COVERT EXFILTRATION
Analyze outbound communications traffic at external interfaces to the system and at the
following interior points to detect covert exfiltration of information: [Assignment:
organization-defined interior points within the system].
Discussion: Organization-defined interior points include subnetworks and subsystems.
Covert means that can be used to exfiltrate information include steganography.
SYSTEM MONITORING | RISK FOR INDIVIDUALS
Implement [Assignment: organization-defined additional monitoring] of individuals who
have been identified by [Assignment: organization-defined sources] as posing an increased
level of risk.
Discussion: Indications of increased risk from individuals can be obtained from different
sources, including personnel records, intelligence agencies, law enforcement organizations,
and other sources. The monitoring of individuals is coordinated with the management, legal,
security, privacy, and human resource officials who conduct such monitoring. Monitoring is
conducted in accordance with applicable laws, executive orders, directives, regulations,
policies, standards, and guidelines
SYSTEM MONITORING | PRIVILEGED USERS
Implement the following additional monitoring of privileged users: [Assignment:
organization-defined additional monitoring].
Discussion: Privileged users have access to more sensitive information, including securityrelated information, than the general user population. Access to such information means
that privileged users can potentially do greater damage to systems and organizations than
non-privileged users. Therefore, implementing additional monitoring on privileged users
helps to ensure that organizations can identify malicious activity at the earliest possible time
and take appropriate actions.
SYSTEM MONITORING | PROBATIONARY PERIODS
Implement the following additional monitoring of individuals during [Assignment:
organization-defined probationary period]: [Assignment: organization-defined additional
monitoring].
Discussion: During probationary periods, employees do not have permanent employment
status within organizations. Without such status or access to information that is resident on
the system, additional monitoring can help identify any potentially malicious activity or
inappropriate behavior
SYSTEM MONITORING | UNAUTHORIZED NETWORK SERVICES
(a) Detect network services that have not been authorized or approved by [Assignment:
organization-defined authorization or approval processes]; and
(b) [Selection (one or more): Audit; Alert [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or
roles]] when detected.
Discussion: Unauthorized or unapproved network services include services in serviceoriented architectures that lack organizational verification or validation and may therefore
be unreliable or serve as malicious rogues for valid services.
SYSTEM MONITORING | HOST-BASED DEVICES
Implement the following host-based monitoring mechanisms at [Assignment:
organization-defined system components]: [Assignment: organization-defined host-based
monitoring mechanisms].
Discussion: Host-based monitoring collects information about the host (or system in which it
resides). System components in which host-based monitoring can be implemented include
servers, notebook computers, and mobile devices. Organizations may consider employing
host-based monitoring mechanisms from multiple product developers or vendors.
SYSTEM MONITORING | INDICATORS OF COMPROMISE
Discover, collect, and distribute to [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles],
indicators of compromise provided by [Assignment: organization-defined sources].
Discussion: Indicators of compromise (IOC) are forensic artifacts from intrusions that are
identified on organizational systems at the host or network level. IOCs provide valuable
information on systems that have been compromised. IOCs can include the creation of
registry key values. IOCs for network traffic include Universal Resource Locator or protocol
elements that indicate malicious code command and control servers. The rapid distribution
and adoption of IOCs can improve information security by reducing the time that systems
and organizations are vulnerable to the same exploit or attack. Threat indicators, signatures,
tactics, techniques, procedures, and other indicators of compromise may be available via
government and non-government cooperatives, including the Forum of Incident Response
and Security Teams, the United States Computer Emergency Readiness Team, the Defense
Industrial Base Cybersecurity Information Sharing Program, and the CERT Coordination
Center.
SYSTEM MONITORING | OPTIMIZE NETWORK TRAFFIC ANALYSIS
Provide visibility into network traffic at external and key internal system interfaces to
optimize the effectiveness of monitoring devices.
Discussion: Encrypted traffic, asymmetric routing architectures, capacity and latency
limitations, and transitioning from older to newer technologies (e.g., IPv4 to IPv6 network
protocol transition) may result in blind spots for organizations when analyzing network
traffic. Collecting, decrypting, pre-processing, and distributing only relevant traffic to
monitoring devices can streamline the efficiency and use of devices and optimize traffic
analysis.