PR.DS-4: Adequate capacity to ensure availability is maintained
AUDIT LOG STORAGE CAPACITY
Control: Allocate audit log storage capacity to accommodate [Assignment: organization-defined
audit log retention requirements].
Discussion: Organizations consider the types of audit logging to be performed and the audit log
processing requirements when allocating audit log storage capacity. Allocating sufficient audit
log storage capacity reduces the likelihood of such capacity being exceeded and resulting in the
potential loss or reduction of audit logging capability.
AUDIT LOG STORAGE CAPACITY | TRANSFER TO ALTERNATE STORAGE
Transfer audit logs [Assignment: organization-defined frequency] to a different system,
system component, or media other than the system or system component conducting the
logging.
Discussion: Audit log transfer, also known as off-loading, is a common process in systems
with limited audit log storage capacity and thus supports availability of the audit logs. The
initial audit log storage is only used in a transitory fashion until the system can communicate
with the secondary or alternate system allocated to audit log storage, at which point the
audit logs are transferred. Transferring audit logs to alternate storage is similar to AU-9(2) in
that audit logs are transferred to a different entity. However, the purpose of selecting AU9(2) is to protect the confidentiality and integrity of audit records. Organizations can select
either control enhancement to obtain the benefit of increased audit log storage capacity and
preserving the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of audit records and logs.
CONTINGENCY PLAN
Control:
a. Develop a contingency plan for the system that:
1. Identifies essential mission and business functions and associated contingency
requirements;
2. Provides recovery objectives, restoration priorities, and metrics;
3. Addresses contingency roles, responsibilities, assigned individuals with contact
information;
4. Addresses maintaining essential mission and business functions despite a system
disruption, compromise, or failure;
5. Addresses eventual, full system restoration without deterioration of the controls
originally planned and implemented;
6. Addresses the sharing of contingency information; and
7. Is reviewed and approved by [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles];
b. Distribute copies of the contingency plan to [Assignment: organization-defined key
contingency personnel (identified by name and/or by role) and organizational elements];
c. Coordinate contingency planning activities with incident handling activities;
d. Review the contingency plan for the system [Assignment: organization-defined frequency];
e. Update the contingency plan to address changes to the organization, system, or
environment of operation and problems encountered during contingency plan
implementation, execution, or testing;
f. Communicate contingency plan changes to [Assignment: organization-defined key
contingency personnel (identified by name and/or by role) and organizational elements];
g. Incorporate lessons learned from contingency plan testing, training, or actual contingency
activities into contingency testing and training; and
h. Protect the contingency plan from unauthorized disclosure and modification.
Discussion: Contingency planning for systems is part of an overall program for achieving
continuity of operations for organizational mission and business functions. Contingency planning
addresses system restoration and implementation of alternative mission or business processes
when systems are compromised or breached. Contingency planning is considered throughout the
system development life cycle and is a fundamental part of the system design. Systems can be
designed for redundancy, to provide backup capabilities, and for resilience. Contingency plans
reflect the degree of restoration required for organizational systems since not all systems need
to fully recover to achieve the level of continuity of operations desired. System recovery
objectives reflect applicable laws, executive orders, directives, regulations, policies, standards,
guidelines, organizational risk tolerance, and system impact level.
Actions addressed in contingency plans include orderly system degradation, system shutdown,
fallback to a manual mode, alternate information flows, and operating in modes reserved for
when systems are under attack. By coordinating contingency planning with incident handling
activities, organizations ensure that the necessary planning activities are in place and activated in
the event of an incident. Organizations consider whether continuity of operations during an
incident conflicts with the capability to automatically disable the system, as specified in IR-4(5).
Incident response planning is part of contingency planning for organizations and is addressed in
the IR (Incident Response) family.
CONTINGENCY PLAN | COORDINATE WITH RELATED PLANS
Coordinate contingency plan development with organizational elements responsible for
related plans.
Discussion: Plans that are related to contingency plans include Business Continuity Plans,
Disaster Recovery Plans, Critical Infrastructure Plans, Continuity of Operations Plans, Crisis
Communications Plans, Insider Threat Implementation Plans, Data Breach Response Plans,
Cyber Incident Response Plans, Breach Response Plans, and Occupant Emergency Plans.
CONTINGENCY PLAN | CAPACITY PLANNING
Conduct capacity planning so that necessary capacity for information processing,
telecommunications, and environmental support exists during contingency operations.
Discussion: Capacity planning is needed because different threats can result in a reduction
of the available processing, telecommunications, and support services intended to support
essential mission and business functions. Organizations anticipate degraded operations
during contingency operations and factor the degradation into capacity planning. For
capacity planning, environmental support refers to any environmental factor for which the
organization determines that it needs to provide support in a contingency situation, even if
in a degraded state. Such determinations are based on an organizational assessment of risk,
system categorization (impact level), and organizational risk tolerance.
CONTINGENCY PLAN | RESUME MISSION AND BUSINESS FUNCTIONS
Plan for the resumption of [Selection: all; essential] mission and business functions within
[Assignment: organization-defined time period] of contingency plan activation.
Discussion: Organizations may choose to conduct contingency planning activities to resume
mission and business functions as part of business continuity planning or as part of business
impact analyses. Organizations prioritize the resumption of mission and business functions.
The time period for resuming mission and business functions may be dependent on the
severity and extent of the disruptions to the system and its supporting infrastructure
CONTINGENCY PLAN | CONTINUE MISSION AND BUSINESS FUNCTIONS
Plan for the continuance of [Selection: all; essential] mission and business functions with
minimal or no loss of operational continuity and sustains that continuity until full system
restoration at primary processing and/or storage sites.
Discussion: Organizations may choose to conduct the contingency planning activities to
continue mission and business functions as part of business continuity planning or business
impact analyses. Primary processing and/or storage sites defined by organizations as part of
contingency planning may change depending on the circumstances associated with the
contingency.
CONTINGENCY PLAN | ALTERNATE PROCESSING AND STORAGE SITES
Plan for the transfer of [Selection: all; essential] mission and business functions to
alternate processing and/or storage sites with minimal or no loss of operational continuity
and sustain that continuity through system restoration to primary processing and/or
storage sites.
Discussion: Organizations may choose to conduct contingency planning activities for
alternate processing and storage sites as part of business continuity planning or business
impact analyses. Primary processing and/or storage sites defined by organizations as part of
contingency planning may change depending on the circumstances associated with the
contingency.
CONTINGENCY PLAN | COORDINATE WITH EXTERNAL SERVICE PROVIDERS
Coordinate the contingency plan with the contingency plans of external service providers
to ensure that contingency requirements can be satisfied.
Discussion: When the capability of an organization to carry out its mission and business
functions is dependent on external service providers, developing a comprehensive and
timely contingency plan may become more challenging. When mission and business
functions are dependent on external service providers, organizations coordinate contingency
planning activities with the external entities to ensure that the individual plans reflect the
overall contingency needs of the organization.
CONTINGENCY PLAN | IDENTIFY CRITICAL ASSETS
Identify critical system assets supporting [Selection: all; essential] mission and business
functions.
Discussion: Organizations may choose to identify critical assets as part of criticality analysis,
business continuity planning, or business impact analyses. Organizations identify critical
system assets so that additional controls can be employed (beyond the controls routinely
implemented) to help ensure that organizational mission and business functions can
continue to be conducted during contingency operations. The identification of critical
information assets also facilitates the prioritization of organizational resources. Critical
system assets include technical and operational aspects. Technical aspects include system
components, information technology services, information technology products, and
mechanisms. Operational aspects include procedures (i.e., manually executed operations)
and personnel (i.e., individuals operating technical controls and/or executing manual
procedures). Organizational program protection plans can assist in identifying critical assets.
If critical assets are resident within or supported by external service providers, organizations
consider implementing CP-2(7) as a control enhancement.
DENIAL-OF-SERVICE PROTECTION
Control:
a. [Selection: Protect against; Limit] the effects of the following types of denial-of-service
events: [Assignment: organization-defined types of denial-of-service events]; and
b. Employ the following controls to achieve the denial-of-service objective: [Assignment:
organization-defined controls by type of denial-of-service event].
Discussion: Denial-of-service events may occur due to a variety of internal and external causes,
such as an attack by an adversary or a lack of planning to support organizational needs with
respect to capacity and bandwidth. Such attacks can occur across a wide range of network
protocols (e.g., IPv4, IPv6). A variety of technologies are available to limit or eliminate the
origination and effects of denial-of-service events. For example, boundary protection devices can
filter certain types of packets to protect system components on internal networks from being
directly affected by or the source of denial-of-service attacks. Employing increased network
capacity and bandwidth combined with service redundancy also reduces the susceptibility to
denial-of-service events
DENIAL-OF-SERVICE PROTECTION | RESTRICT ABILITY TO ATTACK OTHER SYSTEMS
Restrict the ability of individuals to launch the following denial-of-service attacks against
other systems: [Assignment: organization-defined denial-of-service attacks].
Discussion: Restricting the ability of individuals to launch denial-of-service attacks requires
the mechanisms commonly used for such attacks to be unavailable. Individuals of concern
include hostile insiders or external adversaries who have breached or compromised the
system and are using it to launch a denial-of-service attack. Organizations can restrict the
ability of individuals to connect and transmit arbitrary information on the transport medium
(i.e., wired networks, wireless networks, spoofed Internet protocol packets). Organizations
can also limit the ability of individuals to use excessive system resources. Protection against
individuals having the ability to launch denial-of-service attacks may be implemented on
specific systems or boundary devices that prohibit egress to potential target systems
DENIAL-OF-SERVICE PROTECTION | CAPACITY, BANDWIDTH, AND REDUNDANCY
Manage capacity, bandwidth, or other redundancy to limit the effects of information
flooding denial-of-service attacks.
Discussion: Managing capacity ensures that sufficient capacity is available to counter
flooding attacks. Managing capacity includes establishing selected usage priorities, quotas,
partitioning, or load balancing
DENIAL-OF-SERVICE PROTECTION | DETECTION AND MONITORING
(a) Employ the following monitoring tools to detect indicators of denial-of-service attacks
against, or launched from, the system: [Assignment: organization-defined monitoring
tools]; and
(b) Monitor the following system resources to determine if sufficient resources exist to
prevent effective denial-of-service attacks: [Assignment: organization-defined system
resources].
Discussion: Organizations consider the utilization and capacity of system resources when
managing risk associated with a denial of service due to malicious attacks. Denial-of-service
attacks can originate from external or internal sources. System resources that are sensitive
to denial of service include physical disk storage, memory, and CPU cycles. Techniques used
to prevent denial-of-service attacks related to storage utilization and capacity include
instituting disk quotas, configuring systems to automatically alert administrators when
specific storage capacity thresholds are reached, using file compression technologies to
maximize available storage space, and imposing separate partitions for system and user
data.