PR.DS-3: Assets are formally managed throughout removal, transfers, and disposition
SYSTEM COMPONENT INVENTORY
Control:
a. Develop and document an inventory of system components that:
1. Accurately reflects the system;
2. Includes all components within the system;
3. Does not include duplicate accounting of components or components assigned to any
other system;
Is at the level of granularity deemed necessary for tracking and reporting; and
5. Includes the following information to achieve system component accountability:
[Assignment: organization-defined information deemed necessary to achieve effective
system component accountability]; and
b. Review and update the system component inventory [Assignment: organization-defined
frequency].
Discussion: System components are discrete, identifiable information technology assets that
include hardware, software, and firmware. Organizations may choose to implement centralized
system component inventories that include components from all organizational systems. In such
situations, organizations ensure that the inventories include system-specific information required
for component accountability. The information necessary for effective accountability of system
components includes the system name, software owners, software version numbers, hardware
inventory specifications, software license information, and for networked components, the
machine names and network addresses across all implemented protocols (e.g., IPv4, IPv6).
Inventory specifications include date of receipt, cost, model, serial number, manufacturer,
supplier information, component type, and physical location.
Preventing duplicate accounting of system components addresses the lack of accountability that
occurs when component ownership and system association is not known, especially in large or
complex connected systems. Effective prevention of duplicate accounting of system components
necessitates use of a unique identifier for each component. For software inventory, centrally
managed software that is accessed via other systems is addressed as a component of the system
on which it is installed and managed. Software installed on multiple organizational systems and
managed at the system level is addressed for each individual system and may appear more than
once in a centralized component inventory, necessitating a system association for each software
instance in the centralized inventory to avoid duplicate accounting of components. Scanning
systems implementing multiple network protocols (e.g., IPv4 and IPv6) can result in duplicate
components being identified in different address spaces. The implementation of CM-8(7) can
help to eliminate duplicate accounting of components.
SYSTEM COMPONENT INVENTORY | UPDATES DURING INSTALLATION AND REMOVAL
Update the inventory of system components as part of component installations, removals,
and system updates.
Discussion: Organizations can improve the accuracy, completeness, and consistency of
system component inventories if the inventories are updated as part of component
installations or removals or during general system updates. If inventories are not updated at
these key times, there is a greater likelihood that the information will not be appropriately
captured and documented. System updates include hardware, software, and firmware
components.
SYSTEM COMPONENT INVENTORY | AUTOMATED MAINTENANCE
Maintain the currency, completeness, accuracy, and availability of the inventory of system
components using [Assignment: organization-defined automated mechanisms].
Discussion: Organizations maintain system inventories to the extent feasible. For example,
virtual machines can be difficult to monitor because such machines are not visible to the
network when not in use. In such cases, organizations maintain as up-to-date, complete, and
accurate an inventory as is deemed reasonable. Automated maintenance can be achieved by
the implementation of CM-2(2) for organizations that combine system component inventory
and baseline configuration activities.
SYSTEM COMPONENT INVENTORY | AUTOMATED UNAUTHORIZED COMPONENT DETECTION
(a) Detect the presence of unauthorized hardware, software, and firmware components
within the system using [Assignment: organization-defined automated mechanisms]
[Assignment: organization-defined frequency]; and
(b) Take the following actions when unauthorized components are detected: [Selection
(one or more): disable network access by such components; isolate the components;
notify [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles]].
Discussion: Automated unauthorized component detection is applied in addition to the
monitoring for unauthorized remote connections and mobile devices. Monitoring for
unauthorized system components may be accomplished on an ongoing basis or by the
periodic scanning of systems for that purpose. Automated mechanisms may also be used to
prevent the connection of unauthorized components (see CM-7(9)). Automated mechanisms
can be implemented in systems or in separate system components. When acquiring and
implementing automated mechanisms, organizations consider whether such mechanisms
depend on the ability of the system component to support an agent or supplicant in order to
be detected since some types of components do not have or cannot support agents (e.g., IoT
devices, sensors). Isolation can be achieved , for example, by placing unauthorized system
components in separate domains or subnets or quarantining such components. This type of
component isolation is commonly referred to as “sandboxing.”
SYSTEM COMPONENT INVENTORY | ACCOUNTABILITY INFORMATION
Include in the system component inventory information, a means for identifying by
[Selection (one or more): name; position; role], individuals responsible and accountable for
administering those components.
Discussion: Identifying individuals who are responsible and accountable for administering
system components ensures that the assigned components are properly administered and
that organizations can contact those individuals if some action is required (e.g., when the
component is determined to be the source of a breach, needs to be recalled or replaced, or
needs to be relocated)
SYSTEM COMPONENT INVENTORY | ASSESSED CONFIGURATIONS AND APPROVED DEVIATIONS
Include assessed component configurations and any approved deviations to current
deployed configurations in the system component inventory.
Discussion: Assessed configurations and approved deviations focus on configuration settings
established by organizations for system components, the specific components that have
been assessed to determine compliance with the required configuration settings, and any
approved deviations from established configuration settings.
SYSTEM COMPONENT INVENTORY | CENTRALIZED REPOSITORY
Provide a centralized repository for the inventory of system components
Discussion: Organizations may implement centralized system component inventories that
include components from all organizational systems. Centralized repositories of component
inventories provide opportunities for efficiencies in accounting for organizational hardware,
software, and firmware assets. Such repositories may also help organizations rapidly identify
the location and responsible individuals of components that have been compromised,
breached, or are otherwise in need of mitigation actions. Organizations ensure that the
resulting centralized inventories include system-specific information required for proper
component accountability.
SYSTEM COMPONENT INVENTORY | AUTOMATED LOCATION TRACKING
Support the tracking of system components by geographic location using [Assignment:
organization-defined automated mechanisms].
Discussion: The use of automated mechanisms to track the location of system components
can increase the accuracy of component inventories. Such capability may help organizations
rapidly identify the location and responsible individuals of system components that have
been compromised, breached, or are otherwise in need of mitigation actions. The use of
tracking mechanisms can be coordinated with senior agency officials for privacy if there are
implications that affect individual privacy.
SYSTEM COMPONENT INVENTORY | ASSIGNMENT OF COMPONENTS TO SYSTEMS
(a) Assign system components to a system; and
(b) Receive an acknowledgement from [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or
roles] of this assignment.
Discussion: System components that are not assigned to a system may be unmanaged, lack
the required protection, and become an organizational vulnerability.
MEDIA SANITIZATION
Control:
a. Sanitize [Assignment: organization-defined system media] prior to disposal, release out of
organizational control, or release for reuse using [Assignment: organization-defined
sanitization techniques and procedures]; and
b. Employ sanitization mechanisms with the strength and integrity commensurate with the
security category or classification of the information.
Discussion: Media sanitization applies to all digital and non-digital system media subject to
disposal or reuse, whether or not the media is considered removable. Examples include digital
media in scanners, copiers, printers, notebook computers, workstations, network components,
mobile devices, and non-digital media (e.g., paper and microfilm). The sanitization process
removes information from system media such that the information cannot be retrieved or
reconstructed. Sanitization techniques—including clearing, purging, cryptographic erase, deidentification of personally identifiable information, and destruction—prevent the disclosure of
information to unauthorized individuals when such media is reused or released for disposal.
Organizations determine the appropriate sanitization methods, recognizing that destruction is
sometimes necessary when other methods cannot be applied to media requiring sanitization
Organizations use discretion on the employment of approved sanitization techniques and
procedures for media that contains information deemed to be in the public domain or publicly
releasable or information deemed to have no adverse impact on organizations or individuals if
released for reuse or disposal. Sanitization of non-digital media includes destruction, removing a
classified appendix from an otherwise unclassified document, or redacting selected sections or
words from a document by obscuring the redacted sections or words in a manner equivalent in
effectiveness to removing them from the document. NSA standards and policies control the
sanitization process for media that contains classified information. NARA policies control the
sanitization process for controlled unclassified information.
MEDIA SANITIZATION | REVIEW, APPROVE, TRACK, DOCUMENT, AND VERIFY
Review, approve, track, document, and verify media sanitization and disposal actions.
Discussion: Organizations review and approve media to be sanitized to ensure compliance
with records retention policies. Tracking and documenting actions include listing personnel
who reviewed and approved sanitization and disposal actions, types of media sanitized, files
stored on the media, sanitization methods used, date and time of the sanitization actions,
personnel who performed the sanitization, verification actions taken and personnel who
performed the verification, and the disposal actions taken. Organizations verify that the
sanitization of the media was effective prior to disposal.
MEDIA SANITIZATION | EQUIPMENT TESTING
Test sanitization equipment and procedures [Assignment: organization-defined frequency]
to ensure that the intended sanitization is being achieved.
Discussion: Testing of sanitization equipment and procedures may be conducted by
qualified and authorized external entities, including federal agencies or external service
providers
MEDIA SANITIZATION | NONDESTRUCTIVE TECHNIQUES
Apply nondestructive sanitization techniques to portable storage devices prior to
connecting such devices to the system under the following circumstances: [Assignment:
organization-defined circumstances requiring sanitization of portable storage devices].
Discussion: Portable storage devices include external or removable hard disk drives (e.g.,
solid state, magnetic), optical discs, magnetic or optical tapes, flash memory devices, flash
memory cards, and other external or removable disks. Portable storage devices can be
obtained from untrustworthy sources and contain malicious code that can be inserted into
or transferred to organizational systems through USB ports or other entry portals. While
scanning storage devices is recommended, sanitization provides additional assurance that
such devices are free of malicious code. Organizations consider nondestructive sanitization
of portable storage devices when the devices are purchased from manufacturers or vendors
prior to initial use or when organizations cannot maintain a positive chain of custody for the
devices.
MEDIA SANITIZATION | DUAL AUTHORIZATION
Enforce dual authorization for the sanitization of [Assignment: organization-defined
system media].
Discussion: Organizations employ dual authorization to help ensure that system media
sanitization cannot occur unless two technically qualified individuals conduct the designated
task. Individuals who sanitize system media possess sufficient skills and expertise to
determine if the proposed sanitization reflects applicable federal and organizational
standards, policies, and procedures. Dual authorization also helps to ensure that sanitization
occurs as intended, protecting against errors and false claims of having performed the
sanitization actions. Dual authorization may also be known as two-person control. To reduce
the risk of collusion, organizations consider rotating dual authorization duties to other
individuals.
MEDIA SANITIZATION | REMOTE PURGING OR WIPING OF INFORMATION
Provide the capability to purge or wipe information from [Assignment: organizationdefined systems or system components] [Selection: remotely; under the following
conditions: [Assignment: organization-defined conditions]].
Discussion: Remote purging or wiping of information protects information on organizational
systems and system components if systems or components are obtained by unauthorized
individuals. Remote purge or wipe commands require strong authentication to help mitigate
the risk of unauthorized individuals purging or wiping the system, component, or device. The
purge or wipe function can be implemented in a variety of ways, including by overwriting
data or information multiple times or by destroying the key necessary to decrypt encrypted
data.
DELIVERY AND REMOVAL
Control:
a. Authorize and control [Assignment: organization-defined types of system components]
entering and exiting the facility; and
b. Maintain records of the system components.
Discussion: Enforcing authorizations for entry and exit of system components may require
restricting access to delivery areas and isolating the areas from the system and media libraries.