PR.DS-2: Data-in-transit is protected
TRANSMISSION CONFIDENTIALITY AND INTEGRITY
Control: Protect the [Selection (one or more): confidentiality; integrity] of transmitted
information.
Discussion: Protecting the confidentiality and integrity of transmitted information applies to
internal and external networks as well as any system components that can transmit information,
including servers, notebook computers, desktop computers, mobile devices, printers, copiers,
scanners, facsimile machines, and radios. Unprotected communication paths are exposed to the
possibility of interception and modification. Protecting the confidentiality and integrity of
information can be accomplished by physical or logical means. Physical protection can be
achieved by using protected distribution systems. A protected distribution system is a wireline or
fiber-optics telecommunications system that includes terminals and adequate electromagnetic,
acoustical, electrical, and physical controls to permit its use for the unencrypted transmission of
classified information. Logical protection can be achieved by employing encryption techniques.
Organizations that rely on commercial providers who offer transmission services as commodity
services rather than as fully dedicated services may find it difficult to obtain the necessary
assurances regarding the implementation of needed controls for transmission confidentiality and
integrity. In such situations, organizations determine what types of confidentiality or integrity
services are available in standard, commercial telecommunications service packages. If it is not
feasible to obtain the necessary controls and assurances of control effectiveness through
appropriate contracting vehicles, organizations can implement appropriate compensating
controls.
TRANSMISSION CONFIDENTIALITY AND INTEGRITY | CRYPTOGRAPHIC PROTECTION
Implement cryptographic mechanisms to [Selection (one or more): prevent unauthorized
disclosure of information; detect changes to information] during transmission.
Discussion: Encryption protects information from unauthorized disclosure and modification
during transmission. Cryptographic mechanisms that protect the confidentiality and integrity
of information during transmission include TLS and IPSec. Cryptographic mechanisms used to
protect information integrity include cryptographic hash functions that have applications in
digital signatures, checksums, and message authentication codes.
TRANSMISSION CONFIDENTIALITY AND INTEGRITY | PRE- AND POST-TRANSMISSION HANDLING
Maintain the [Selection (one or more): confidentiality; integrity] of information during
preparation for transmission and during reception.
Discussion: Information can be unintentionally or maliciously disclosed or modified during
preparation for transmission or during reception, including during aggregation, at protocol
transformation points, and during packing and unpacking. Such unauthorized disclosures or
modifications compromise the confidentiality or integrity of the information.
TRANSMISSION CONFIDENTIALITY AND INTEGRITY | CRYPTOGRAPHIC PROTECTION FOR MESSAGE
EXTERNALS
Implement cryptographic mechanisms to protect message externals unless otherwise
protected by [Assignment: organization-defined alternative physical controls].
Discussion: Cryptographic protection for message externals addresses protection from the
unauthorized disclosure of information. Message externals include message headers and
routing information. Cryptographic protection prevents the exploitation of message
externals and applies to internal and external networks or links that may be visible to
individuals who are not authorized users. Header and routing information is sometimes
transmitted in clear text (i.e., unencrypted) because the information is not identified by
organizations as having significant value or because encrypting the information can result in
lower network performance or higher costs. Alternative physical controls include protected
distribution systems
TRANSMISSION CONFIDENTIALITY AND INTEGRITY | CONCEAL OR RANDOMIZE COMMUNICATIONS
Implement cryptographic mechanisms to conceal or randomize communication patterns
unless otherwise protected by [Assignment: organization-defined alternative physical
controls].
Discussion: Concealing or randomizing communication patterns addresses protection from
unauthorized disclosure of information. Communication patterns include frequency, periods,
predictability, and amount. Changes to communications patterns can reveal information
with intelligence value, especially when combined with other available information related
to the mission and business functions of the organization. Concealing or randomizing
communications prevents the derivation of intelligence based on communications patterns
and applies to both internal and external networks or links that may be visible to individuals
who are not authorized users. Encrypting the links and transmitting in continuous, fixed, or
random patterns prevents the derivation of intelligence from the system communications
patterns. Alternative physical controls include protected distribution systems.
TRANSMISSION CONFIDENTIALITY AND INTEGRITY | PROTECTED DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM
Implement [Assignment: organization-defined protected distribution system] to [Selection
(one or more): prevent unauthorized disclosure of information; detect changes to
information] during transmission.
Discussion: The purpose of a protected distribution system is to deter, detect, and/or make
difficult physical access to the communication lines that carry national security information.
TRUSTED PATH
Control:
a. Provide a [Selection: physically; logically] isolated trusted communications path for
communications between the user and the trusted components of the system; and
Permit users to invoke the trusted communications path for communications between the
user and the following security functions of the system, including at a minimum,
authentication and re-authentication: [Assignment: organization-defined security functions].
Discussion: Trusted paths are mechanisms by which users can communicate (using input devices
such as keyboards) directly with the security functions of systems with the requisite assurance to
support security policies. Trusted path mechanisms can only be activated by users or the security
functions of organizational systems. User responses that occur via trusted paths are protected
from modification by and disclosure to untrusted applications. Organizations employ trusted
paths for trustworthy, high-assurance connections between security functions of systems and
users, including during system logons. The original implementations of trusted paths employed
an out-of-band signal to initiate the path, such as using the <BREAK> key, which does not
transmit characters that can be spoofed. In later implementations, a key combination that could
not be hijacked was used (e.g., the <CTRL> + <ALT> + <DEL> keys). Such key combinations,
however, are platform-specific and may not provide a trusted path implementation in every case.
The enforcement of trusted communications paths is provided by a specific implementation that
meets the reference monitor concept.
TRUSTED PATH | IRREFUTABLE COMMUNICATIONS PATH
(a) Provide a trusted communications path that is irrefutably distinguishable from other
communications paths; and
(b) Initiate the trusted communications path for communications between the
[Assignment: organization-defined security functions] of the system and the user.
Discussion: An irrefutable communications path permits the system to initiate a trusted path,
which necessitates that the user can unmistakably recognize the source of the communication as
a trusted system component. For example, the trusted path may appear in an area of the display
that other applications cannot access or be based on the presence of an identifier that cannot be
spoofed.
CRYPTOGRAPHIC KEY ESTABLISHMENT AND MANAGEMENT
Control: Establish and manage cryptographic keys when cryptography is employed within the
system in accordance with the following key management requirements: [Assignment:
organization-defined requirements for key generation, distribution, storage, access, and
destruction].
Discussion: Cryptographic key management and establishment can be performed using manual
procedures or automated mechanisms with supporting manual procedures. Organizations define
key management requirements in accordance with applicable laws, executive orders, directives,
regulations, policies, standards, and guidelines and specify appropriate options, parameters, and
levels. Organizations manage trust stores to ensure that only approved trust anchors are part of
such trust stores. This includes certificates with visibility external to organizational systems and
certificates related to the internal operations of systems. [NIST CMVP] and [NIST CAVP] provide
additional information on validated cryptographic modules and algorithms that can be used in
cryptographic key management and establishment
CRYPTOGRAPHIC KEY ESTABLISHMENT AND MANAGEMENT | AVAILABILITY
Maintain availability of information in the event of the loss of cryptographic keys by users.
Discussion: Escrowing of encryption keys is a common practice for ensuring availability in
the event of key loss. A forgotten passphrase is an example of losing a cryptographic key.
CRYPTOGRAPHIC KEY ESTABLISHMENT AND MANAGEMENT | SYMMETRIC KEYS
Produce, control, and distribute symmetric cryptographic keys using [Selection: NIST FIPSvalidated; NSA-approved] key management technology and processes.
Discussion: [SP 800-56A], [SP 800-56B], and [SP 800-56C] provide guidance on cryptographic
key establishment schemes and key derivation methods. [SP 800-57-1], [SP 800-57-2], and
[SP 800-57-3] provide guidance on cryptographic key management.
CRYPTOGRAPHIC KEY ESTABLISHMENT AND MANAGEMENT | ASYMMETRIC KEYS
Produce, control, and distribute asymmetric cryptographic keys using [Selection: NSAapproved key management technology and processes; prepositioned keying material;
DoD-approved or DoD-issued Medium Assurance PKI certificates; DoD-approved or DoDissued Medium Hardware Assurance PKI certificates and hardware security tokens that
protect the user’s private key; certificates issued in accordance with organization-defined
requirements].
Discussion: [SP 800-56A], [SP 800-56B], and [SP 800-56C] provide guidance on cryptographic
key establishment schemes and key derivation methods. [SP 800-57-1], [SP 800-57-2], and
[SP 800-57-3] provide guidance on cryptographic key management.
CRYPTOGRAPHIC KEY ESTABLISHMENT AND MANAGEMENT | PHYSICAL CONTROL OF KEYS
Maintain physical control of cryptographic keys when stored information is encrypted by
external service providers.
Discussion: For organizations that use external service providers (e.g., cloud service or data
center providers), physical control of cryptographic keys provides additional assurance that
information stored by such external providers is not subject to unauthorized disclosure or
modification