PR.DS-1: Data-at-rest is protected
MEDIA DOWNGRADING
Control:
a. Establish [Assignment: organization-defined system media downgrading process] that
includes employing downgrading mechanisms with strength and integrity commensurate
with the security category or classification of the information;
b. Verify that the system media downgrading process is commensurate with the security
category and/or classification level of the information to be removed and the access
authorizations of the potential recipients of the downgraded information;
c. Identify [Assignment: organization-defined system media requiring downgrading]; and
d. Downgrade the identified system media using the established process.
Discussion: Media downgrading applies to digital and non-digital media subject to release
outside of the organization, whether the media is considered removable or not. When applied to
system media, the downgrading process removes information from the media, typically by
security category or classification level, such that the information cannot be retrieved or
reconstructed. Downgrading of media includes redacting information to enable wider release
and distribution. Downgrading ensures that empty space on the media is devoid of information.
MEDIA DOWNGRADING | DOCUMENTATION OF PROCESS
Document system media downgrading actions
Discussion: Organizations can document the media downgrading process by providing
information, such as the downgrading technique employed, the identification number of the
downgraded media, and the identity of the individual that authorized and/or performed the
downgrading action.
MEDIA DOWNGRADING | EQUIPMENT TESTING
Test downgrading equipment and procedures [Assignment: organization-defined
frequency] to ensure that downgrading actions are being achieved.
MEDIA DOWNGRADING | CONTROLLED UNCLASSIFIED INFORMATION
Downgrade system media containing controlled unclassified information prior to public
release.
Discussion: The downgrading of controlled unclassified information uses approved
sanitization tools, techniques, and procedures.
MEDIA DOWNGRADING | CLASSIFIED INFORMATION
Downgrade system media containing classified information prior to release to individuals
without required access authorizations.
Discussion: Downgrading of classified information uses approved sanitization tools,
techniques, and procedures to transfer information confirmed to be unclassified from
classified systems to unclassified media
CRYPTOGRAPHIC KEY ESTABLISHMENT AND MANAGEMENT
Control: Establish and manage cryptographic keys when cryptography is employed within the
system in accordance with the following key management requirements: [Assignment:
organization-defined requirements for key generation, distribution, storage, access, and
destruction].
Discussion: Cryptographic key management and establishment can be performed using manual
procedures or automated mechanisms with supporting manual procedures. Organizations define
key management requirements in accordance with applicable laws, executive orders, directives,
regulations, policies, standards, and guidelines and specify appropriate options, parameters, and
levels. Organizations manage trust stores to ensure that only approved trust anchors are part of
such trust stores. This includes certificates with visibility external to organizational systems and
certificates related to the internal operations of systems. [NIST CMVP] and [NIST CAVP] provide
additional information on validated cryptographic modules and algorithms that can be used in
cryptographic key management and establishment
CRYPTOGRAPHIC KEY ESTABLISHMENT AND MANAGEMENT | AVAILABILITY
Maintain availability of information in the event of the loss of cryptographic keys by users.
Discussion: Escrowing of encryption keys is a common practice for ensuring availability in
the event of key loss. A forgotten passphrase is an example of losing a cryptographic key
CRYPTOGRAPHIC KEY ESTABLISHMENT AND MANAGEMENT | SYMMETRIC KEYS
Produce, control, and distribute symmetric cryptographic keys using [Selection: NIST FIPSvalidated; NSA-approved] key management technology and processes.
Discussion: [SP 800-56A], [SP 800-56B], and [SP 800-56C] provide guidance on cryptographic
key establishment schemes and key derivation methods. [SP 800-57-1], [SP 800-57-2], and
[SP 800-57-3] provide guidance on cryptographic key management.
CRYPTOGRAPHIC KEY ESTABLISHMENT AND MANAGEMENT | ASYMMETRIC KEYS
Produce, control, and distribute asymmetric cryptographic keys using [Selection: NSAapproved key management technology and processes; prepositioned keying material;
DoD-approved or DoD-issued Medium Assurance PKI certificates; DoD-approved or DoDissued Medium Hardware Assurance PKI certificates and hardware security tokens that
protect the user’s private key; certificates issued in accordance with organization-defined
requirements].
Discussion: [SP 800-56A], [SP 800-56B], and [SP 800-56C] provide guidance on cryptographic
key establishment schemes and key derivation methods. [SP 800-57-1], [SP 800-57-2], and
[SP 800-57-3] provide guidance on cryptographic key management.
CRYPTOGRAPHIC KEY ESTABLISHMENT AND MANAGEMENT | PHYSICAL CONTROL OF KEYS
Maintain physical control of cryptographic keys when stored information is encrypted by
external service providers.
Discussion: For organizations that use external service providers (e.g., cloud service or data
center providers), physical control of cryptographic keys provides additional assurance that
information stored by such external providers is not subject to unauthorized disclosure or
modification
PROTECTION OF INFORMATION AT REST
Control: Protect the [Selection (one or more): confidentiality; integrity] of the following
information at rest: [Assignment: organization-defined information at rest].
Discussion: Information at rest refers to the state of information when it is not in process or in
transit and is located on system components. Such components include internal or external hard
disk drives, storage area network devices, or databases. However, the focus of protecting
information at rest is not on the type of storage device or frequency of access but rather on the
state of the information. Information at rest addresses the confidentiality and integrity of
information and covers user information and system information. System-related information
that requires protection includes configurations or rule sets for firewalls, intrusion detection and
prevention systems, filtering routers, and authentication information. Organizations may employ
different mechanisms to achieve confidentiality and integrity protections, including the use of
cryptographic mechanisms and file share scanning. Integrity protection can be achieved, for
example, by implementing write-once-read-many (WORM) technologies. When adequate
protection of information at rest cannot otherwise be achieved, organizations may employ other
controls, including frequent scanning to identify malicious code at rest and secure offline storage
in lieu of online storage.
PROTECTION OF INFORMATION AT REST | CRYPTOGRAPHIC PROTECTION
Implement cryptographic mechanisms to prevent unauthorized disclosure and
modification of the following information at rest on [Assignment: organization-defined
system components or media]: [Assignment: organization-defined information].
Discussion: The selection of cryptographic mechanisms is based on the need to protect the
confidentiality and integrity of organizational information. The strength of mechanism is
commensurate with the security category or classification of the information. Organizations
have the flexibility to encrypt information on system components or media or encrypt data
structures, including files, records, or fields.
PROTECTION OF INFORMATION AT REST | OFFLINE STORAGE
Remove the following information from online storage and store offline in a secure
location: [Assignment: organization-defined information].
Discussion: Removing organizational information from online storage to offline storage
eliminates the possibility of individuals gaining unauthorized access to the information
through a network. Therefore, organizations may choose to move information to offline
storage in lieu of protecting such information in online storage
PROTECTION OF INFORMATION AT REST | CRYPTOGRAPHIC KEYS
Provide protected storage for cryptographic keys [Selection: [Assignment: organizationdefined safeguards]; hardware-protected key store].
Discussion: A Trusted Platform Module (TPM) is an example of a hardware-protected data
store that can be used to protect cryptographic keys.