RS.MI-3: Newly identified vulnerabilities are mitigated or documented as accepted risks
CONTINUOUS MONITORING
Control: Develop a system-level continuous monitoring strategy and implement continuous
monitoring in accordance with the organization-level continuous monitoring strategy that
includes:
a. Establishing the following system-level metrics to be monitored: [Assignment: organizationdefined system-level metrics];
b. Establishing [Assignment: organization-defined frequencies] for monitoring and
[Assignment: organization-defined frequencies] for assessment of control effectiveness;
c. Ongoing control assessments in accordance with the continuous monitoring strategy;
d. Ongoing monitoring of system and organization-defined metrics in accordance with the
continuous monitoring strategy;
e. Correlation and analysis of information generated by control assessments and monitoring;
f. Response actions to address results of the analysis of control assessment and monitoring
information; and
g. Reporting the security and privacy status of the system to [Assignment: organizationdefined personnel or roles] [Assignment: organization-defined frequency].
Discussion: Continuous monitoring at the system level facilitates ongoing awareness of the
system security and privacy posture to support organizational risk management decisions. The
terms “continuous” and “ongoing” imply that organizations assess and monitor their controls
and risks at a frequency sufficient to support risk-based decisions. Different types of controls may
require different monitoring frequencies. The results of continuous monitoring generate risk
response actions by organizations. When monitoring the effectiveness of multiple controls that
have been grouped into capabilities, a root-cause analysis may be needed to determine the
specific control that has failed. Continuous monitoring programs allow organizations to maintain
the authorizations of systems and common controls in highly dynamic environments of operation
with changing mission and business needs, threats, vulnerabilities, and technologies. Having
access to security and privacy information on a continuing basis through reports and dashboards
gives organizational officials the ability to make effective and timely risk management decisions,
including ongoing authorization decisions.
Automation supports more frequent updates to hardware, software, and firmware inventories,
authorization packages, and other system information. Effectiveness is further enhanced when
continuous monitoring outputs are formatted to provide information that is specific, measurable,
actionable, relevant, and timely. Continuous monitoring activities are scaled in accordance with
the security categories of systems. Monitoring requirements, including the need for specific
monitoring, may be referenced in other controls and control enhancements,
CONTINUOUS MONITORING | INDEPENDENT ASSESSMENT
Employ independent assessors or assessment teams to monitor the controls in the system
on an ongoing basis.
Discussion: Organizations maximize the value of control assessments by requiring that
assessments be conducted by assessors with appropriate levels of independence. The level
of required independence is based on organizational continuous monitoring strategies.
Assessor independence provides a degree of impartiality to the monitoring process. To
achieve such impartiality, assessors do not create a mutual or conflicting interest with the
organizations where the assessments are being conducted, assess their own work, act as
management or employees of the organizations they are serving, or place themselves in
advocacy positions for the organizations acquiring their services.
CONTINUOUS MONITORING | TREND ANALYSES
Employ trend analyses to determine if control implementations, the frequency of
continuous monitoring activities, and the types of activities used in the continuous
monitoring process need to be modified based on empirical data.
Discussion: Trend analyses include examining recent threat information that addresses the
types of threat events that have occurred in the organization or the Federal Government,
success rates of certain types of attacks, emerging vulnerabilities in technologies, evolving
social engineering techniques, the effectiveness of configuration settings, results from
multiple control assessments, and findings from Inspectors General or auditors
CONTINUOUS MONITORING | RISK MONITORING
Ensure risk monitoring is an integral part of the continuous monitoring strategy that
includes the following:
(a) Effectiveness monitoring;
(b) Compliance monitoring; and
(c) Change monitoring.
Discussion: Risk monitoring is informed by the established organizational risk tolerance.
Effectiveness monitoring determines the ongoing effectiveness of the implemented risk
response measures. Compliance monitoring verifies that required risk response measures
are implemented. It also verifies that security and privacy requirements are satisfied. Change
monitoring identifies changes to organizational systems and environments of operation that
may affect security and privacy risk.
CONTINUOUS MONITORING | CONSISTENCY ANALYSIS
Employ the following actions to validate that policies are established and implemented
controls are operating in a consistent manner: [Assignment: organization-defined actions].
Discussion: Security and privacy controls are often added incrementally to a system. As a
result, policies for selecting and implementing controls may be inconsistent, and the controls
could fail to work together in a consistent or coordinated manner. At a minimum, the lack of
consistency and coordination could mean that there are unacceptable security and privacy
gaps in the system. At worst, it could mean that some of the controls implemented in one
location or by one component are actually impeding the functionality of other controls (e.g.,
encrypting internal network traffic can impede monitoring). In other situations, failing to
consistently monitor all implemented network protocols (e.g., a dual stack of IPv4 and IPv6)
may create unintended vulnerabilities in the system that could be exploited by adversaries.
It is important to validate—through testing, monitoring, and analysis—that the implemented
controls are operating in a consistent, coordinated, non-interfering manner.
CONTINUOUS MONITORING | AUTOMATION SUPPORT FOR MONITORING
Ensure the accuracy, currency, and availability of monitoring results for the system using
[Assignment: organization-defined automated mechanisms].
Discussion: Using automated tools for monitoring helps to maintain the accuracy, currency,
and availability of monitoring information which in turns helps to increase the level of
ongoing awareness of the system security and privacy posture in support of organizational
risk management decisions.
RISK ASSESSMENT
Control:
a. Conduct a risk assessment, including:
1. Identifying threats to and vulnerabilities in the system;
2. Determining the likelihood and magnitude of harm from unauthorized access, use,
disclosure, disruption, modification, or destruction of the system, the information it
processes, stores, or transmits, and any related information; and
3. Determining the likelihood and impact of adverse effects on individuals arising from the
processing of personally identifiable information;
b. Integrate risk assessment results and risk management decisions from the organization and
mission or business process perspectives with system-level risk assessments;
c. Document risk assessment results in [Selection: security and privacy plans; risk assessment
report; [Assignment: organization-defined document]];
d. Review risk assessment results [Assignment: organization-defined frequency];
e. Disseminate risk assessment results to [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or
roles]; and
f. Update the risk assessment [Assignment: organization-defined frequency] or when there are
significant changes to the system, its environment of operation, or other conditions that may
impact the security or privacy state of the system.
Discussion: Risk assessments consider threats, vulnerabilities, likelihood, and impact to
organizational operations and assets, individuals, other organizations, and the Nation. Risk
assessments also consider risk from external parties, including contractors who operate systems
on behalf of the organization, individuals who access organizational systems, service providers,
and outsourcing entities.
Organizations can conduct risk assessments at all three levels in the risk management hierarchy
(i.e., organization level, mission/business process level, or information system level) and at any
stage in the system development life cycle. Risk assessments can also be conducted at various
steps in the Risk Management Framework, including preparation, categorization, control
selection, control implementation, control assessment, authorization, and control monitoring.
Risk assessment is an ongoing activity carried out throughout the system development life cycle.
Risk assessments can also address information related to the system, including system design,
the intended use of the system, testing results, and supply chain-related information or artifacts.
Risk assessments can play an important role in control selection processes, particularly during
the application of tailoring guidance and in the earliest phases of capability determination.
RISK ASSESSMENT | SUPPLY CHAIN RISK ASSESSMENT
(a) Assess supply chain risks associated with [Assignment: organization-defined systems,
system components, and system services]; and
(b) Update the supply chain risk assessment [Assignment: organization-defined
frequency], when there are significant changes to the relevant supply chain, or when
changes to the system, environments of operation, or other conditions may
necessitate a change in the supply chain.
Discussion: Supply chain-related events include disruption, use of defective components,
insertion of counterfeits, theft, malicious development practices, improper delivery
practices, and insertion of malicious code. These events can have a significant impact on the
confidentiality, integrity, or availability of a system and its information and, therefore, can
also adversely impact organizational operations (including mission, functions, image, or
reputation), organizational assets, individuals, other organizations, and the Nation. The
supply chain-related events may be unintentional or malicious and can occur at any point
during the system life cycle. An analysis of supply chain risk can help an organization identify
systems or components for which additional supply chain risk mitigations are required.
RISK ASSESSMENT | USE OF ALL-SOURCE INTELLIGENCE
Use all-source intelligence to assist in the analysis of risk.
Discussion: Organizations employ all-source intelligence to inform engineering, acquisition,
and risk management decisions. All-source intelligence consists of information derived from
all available sources, including publicly available or open-source information, measurement
and signature intelligence, human intelligence, signals intelligence, and imagery intelligence.
All-source intelligence is used to analyze the risk of vulnerabilities (both intentional and
unintentional) from development, manufacturing, and delivery processes, people, and the
environment. The risk analysis may be performed on suppliers at multiple tiers in the supply
chain sufficient to manage risks. Organizations may develop agreements to share all-source
intelligence information or resulting decisions with other organizations, as appropriate.
RISK ASSESSMENT | DYNAMIC THREAT AWARENESS
Determine the current cyber threat environment on an ongoing basis using [Assignment:
organization-defined means].
Discussion: The threat awareness information that is gathered feeds into the organization’s
information security operations to ensure that procedures are updated in response to the
changing threat environment. For example, at higher threat levels, organizations may
change the privilege or authentication thresholds required to perform certain operations.
RISK ASSESSMENT | PREDICTIVE CYBER ANALYTICS
Employ the following advanced automation and analytics capabilities to predict and
identify risks to [Assignment: organization-defined systems or system components]:
[Assignment: organization-defined advanced automation and analytics capabilities].
Discussion: A properly resourced Security Operations Center (SOC) or Computer Incident
Response Team (CIRT) may be overwhelmed by the volume of information generated by the
proliferation of security tools and appliances unless it employs advanced automation and
analytics to analyze the data. Advanced automation and analytics capabilities are typically
supported by artificial intelligence concepts, including machine learning. Examples include
Automated Threat Discovery and Response (which includes broad-based collection, contextbased analysis, and adaptive response capabilities), automated workflow operations, and
machine assisted decision tools. Note, however, that sophisticated adversaries may be able
to extract information related to analytic parameters and retrain the machine learning to
classify malicious activity as benign. Accordingly, machine learning is augmented by human
monitoring to ensure that sophisticated adversaries are not able to conceal their activities.
VULNERABILITY MONITORING AND SCANNING
Control:
a. Monitor and scan for vulnerabilities in the system and hosted applications [Assignment:
organization-defined frequency and/or randomly in accordance with organization-defined
process] and when new vulnerabilities potentially affecting the system are identified and
reported;
b. Employ vulnerability monitoring tools and techniques that facilitate interoperability among
tools and automate parts of the vulnerability management process by using standards for:
1. Enumerating platforms, software flaws, and improper configurations;
2. Formatting checklists and test procedures; and
3. Measuring vulnerability impact;
c. Analyze vulnerability scan reports and results from vulnerability monitoring;
d. Remediate legitimate vulnerabilities [Assignment: organization-defined response times] in
accordance with an organizational assessment of risk;
e. Share information obtained from the vulnerability monitoring process and control
assessments with [Assignment: organization-defined personnel or roles] to help eliminate
similar vulnerabilities in other systems; and
f. Employ vulnerability monitoring tools that include the capability to readily update the
vulnerabilities to be scanned.
Discussion: Security categorization of information and systems guides the frequency and
comprehensiveness of vulnerability monitoring (including scans). Organizations determine the
required vulnerability monitoring for system components, ensuring that the potential sources of
vulnerabilities—such as infrastructure components (e.g., switches, routers, guards, sensors),
networked printers, scanners, and copiers—are not overlooked. The capability to readily update
vulnerability monitoring tools as new vulnerabilities are discovered and announced and as new
scanning methods are developed helps to ensure that new vulnerabilities are not missed by
employed vulnerability monitoring tools. The vulnerability monitoring tool update process helps
to ensure that potential vulnerabilities in the system are identified and addressed as quickly as
possible. Vulnerability monitoring and analyses for custom software may require additional
approaches, such as static analysis, dynamic analysis, binary analysis, or a hybrid of the three
approaches. Organizations can use these analysis approaches in source code reviews and in a
variety of tools, including web-based application scanners, static analysis tools, and binary
analyzers.
Vulnerability monitoring includes scanning for patch levels; scanning for functions, ports,
protocols, and services that should not be accessible to users or devices; and scanning for flow
control mechanisms that are improperly configured or operating incorrectly. Vulnerability
monitoring may also include continuous vulnerability monitoring tools that use instrumentation
to continuously analyze components. Instrumentation-based tools may improve accuracy and
may be run throughout an organization without scanning. Vulnerability monitoring tools that
facilitate interoperability include tools that are Security Content Automated Protocol (SCAP)-
validated. Thus, organizations consider using scanning tools that express vulnerabilities in the
Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures (CVE) naming convention and that employ the Open
Vulnerability Assessment Language (OVAL) to determine the presence of vulnerabilities. Sources
for vulnerability information include the Common Weakness Enumeration (CWE) listing and the
National Vulnerability Database (NVD). Control assessments, such as red team exercises, provide
additional sources of potential vulnerabilities for which to scan. Organizations also consider using
scanning tools that express vulnerability impact by the Common Vulnerability Scoring System
(CVSS).
Vulnerability monitoring includes a channel and process for receiving reports of security
vulnerabilities from the public at-large. Vulnerability disclosure programs can be as simple as
publishing a monitored email address or web form that can receive reports, including notification
authorizing good-faith research and disclosure of security vulnerabilities. Organizations generally
expect that such research is happening with or without their authorization and can use public
vulnerability disclosure channels to increase the likelihood that discovered vulnerabilities are
reported directly to the organization for remediation.
Organizations may also employ the use of financial incentives (also known as “bug bounties”) to
further encourage external security researchers to report discovered vulnerabilities. Bug bounty
programs can be tailored to the organization’s needs. Bounties can be operated indefinitely or
over a defined period of time and can be offered to the general public or to a curated group.
Organizations may run public and private bounties simultaneously and could choose to offer
partially credentialed access to certain participants in order to evaluate security vulnerabilities
from privileged vantage points.
VULNERABILITY MONITORING AND SCANNING | UPDATE VULNERABILITIES TO BE SCANNED
Update the system vulnerabilities to be scanned [Selection (one or more): [Assignment:
organization-defined frequency]; prior to a new scan; when new vulnerabilities are
identified and reported].
Discussion: Due to the complexity of modern software, systems, and other factors, new
vulnerabilities are discovered on a regular basis. It is important that newly discovered
vulnerabilities are added to the list of vulnerabilities to be scanned to ensure that the
organization can take steps to mitigate those vulnerabilities in a timely manner.
VULNERABILITY MONITORING AND SCANNING | BREADTH AND DEPTH OF COVERAGE
Define the breadth and depth of vulnerability scanning coverage.
Discussion: The breadth of vulnerability scanning coverage can be expressed as a
percentage of components within the system, by the particular types of systems, by the
criticality of systems, or by the number of vulnerabilities to be checked. Conversely, the
depth of vulnerability scanning coverage can be expressed as the level of the system design
that the organization intends to monitor (e.g., component, module, subsystem, element).
Organizations can determine the sufficiency of vulnerability scanning coverage with regard
to its risk tolerance and other factors. Scanning tools and how the tools are configured may
affect the depth and coverage. Multiple scanning tools may be needed to achieve the
desired depth and coverage. [SP 800-53A] provides additional information on the breadth
and depth of coverage.
VULNERABILITY MONITORING AND SCANNING | DISCOVERABLE INFORMATION
Determine information about the system that is discoverable and take [Assignment:
organization-defined corrective actions].
Discussion: Discoverable information includes information that adversaries could obtain
without compromising or breaching the system, such as by collecting information that the
system is exposing or by conducting extensive web searches. Corrective actions include
notifying appropriate organizational personnel, removing designated information, or
changing the system to make the designated information less relevant or attractive to
adversaries. This enhancement excludes intentionally discoverable information that may be
part of a decoy capability (e.g., honeypots, honeynets, or deception nets) deployed by the
organization
VULNERABILITY MONITORING AND SCANNING | PRIVILEGED ACCESS
Implement privileged access authorization to [Assignment: organization-defined system
components] for [Assignment: organization-defined vulnerability scanning activities].
Discussion: In certain situations, the nature of the vulnerability scanning may be more
intrusive, or the system component that is the subject of the scanning may contain classified
or controlled unclassified information, such as personally identifiable information. Privileged
access authorization to selected system components facilitates more thorough vulnerability
scanning and protects the sensitive nature of such scanning
VULNERABILITY MONITORING AND SCANNING | AUTOMATED TREND ANALYSES
Compare the results of multiple vulnerability scans using [Assignment: organizationdefined automated mechanisms].
Discussion: Using automated mechanisms to analyze multiple vulnerability scans over time
can help determine trends in system vulnerabilities and identify patterns of attack.
VULNERABILITY MONITORING AND SCANNING | REVIEW HISTORIC AUDIT LOGS
Review historic audit logs to determine if a vulnerability identified in a [Assignment:
organization-defined system] has been previously exploited within an [Assignment:
organization-defined time period].
Discussion: Reviewing historic audit logs to determine if a recently detected vulnerability in
a system has been previously exploited by an adversary can provide important information
for forensic analyses. Such analyses can help identify, for example, the extent of a previous
intrusion, the trade craft employed during the attack, organizational information exfiltrated
or modified, mission or business capabilities affected, and the duration of the attack.
VULNERABILITY MONITORING AND SCANNING | CORRELATE SCANNING INFORMATION
Correlate the output from vulnerability scanning tools to determine the presence of multivulnerability and multi-hop attack vectors.
Discussion: An attack vector is a path or means by which an adversary can gain access to a
system in order to deliver malicious code or exfiltrate information. Organizations can use
attack trees to show how hostile activities by adversaries interact and combine to produce
adverse impacts or negative consequences to systems and organizations. Such information,
together with correlated data from vulnerability scanning tools, can provide greater clarity
regarding multi-vulnerability and multi-hop attack vectors. The correlation of vulnerability
scanning information is especially important when organizations are transitioning from older
technologies to newer technologies (e.g., transitioning from IPv4 to IPv6 network protocols).
During such transitions, some system components may inadvertently be unmanaged and
create opportunities for adversary exploitation
VULNERABILITY MONITORING AND SCANNING | PUBLIC DISCLOSURE PROGRAM
Establish a public reporting channel for receiving reports of vulnerabilities in
organizational systems and system components.
Discussion: The reporting channel is publicly discoverable and contains clear language
authorizing good-faith research and the disclosure of vulnerabilities to the organization. The
organization does not condition its authorization on an expectation of indefinite nondisclosure to the public by the reporting entity but may request a specific time period to
properly remediate the vulnerability.